FUNDAMENTALS OF JAINISM
BY
CHAMPAT RAI JAIN
BARRISTER-AT-LAW
Author of THE KEY OF KNOWLEDGE, THE SCIENCE OF THOUGHT,
ETC.,
Translator of The Ratnakranda Sravakachar
(A REVISED EDITION OF "THE PRACTICAL PATH")
VEER NIRVAN BHARTI
69, TEERGRAN STREET
MEERUT-250 002 U.P. (INDIA)
Published with the help of:
L. NANAG RAM JAIN
Maliwara, Delhi-110 006
1100 Copies
Vir Nirvan Samvat 2500
Year 1974
Price Rs. 5.00
LIBRARY EDITION
Price Rs. 8.00
PRABHAT PRESS, MEERUT.
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

PREFACE
(FIRST EDITION)
'The Practical Path' is a companion volume to my earlier work, 'The Key of
Knowledge', to which the reader is referred for fuller information on the subject
of comparative theology, and for a general survey of the basic principles of
religion. The object of the present volume is to point out the practical,
scientific method of self-realization, as laid down by the Jaina Tirthankaras who
rose to the highest height of perfection with its aid. I have, therefore, refrained
from repeating what I have already said in 'The Key of Knowledge', though no
effort has been spared to make the present volume as self-contained and
complete in its own department as possible.
It is conceivable that the detailed information on the subject of Karma and other
matters contained in the following pages might prove a little too tiresome for a
certain class of critics; but obviously no details are too many for a proper study
of a subject, and the mind which feels confounded with fullness of detail is
never of the scientific sort, but only a frivolous one. There is no department of
science, which can afford to dispense with detailed knowledge; nor can ought,
but palsy of intellect result from unscientific thought. For this very reason, it
has not been found necessary to refer to the non-Jaina systems of Yoga, as they
mainly content themselves with general discourses on abstract propositions
about the method of self-realization. Mystic in thought and tendency, they are
seldom, if ever, clear or exact enough to enable one to know precisely what to
do in a given situation, and are not only useless and dangerous to experiment
with, but also foster much unholy superstition and spirit of mystification in the
minds of men by their veiled and obscure hints and innuendoes.
HARDOI: C. R. JAIN
1st October 1916.
This is a reprint of the Book "The Practical Path" written by Late Shri
Champat Rai Jain Barrister-at-Law. Out of ten chapters in the old book only
first nine chapters have been included in this edition and the book has been
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

re-named as "Fundamentals of Jainism". there is great dearth of an
Authenticated book on the Jainism in English as such Veer Nirvan Bharti, with
blessings of Pujya Mahamuni Shri 108 Vidyanand Ji, decided to reprint this
book. This is the Vth publication of Veer Nirvan Bharti and we hope in the
present book, readers will understand easily the Principles of Jainism.
Sunder Lal Jain
President
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

CONTENTS
CHAPTERS
INTRODUCTION
'THE METHOD OF PHILOSOPHY'
THE TATTVAS
II. THE NATURE OF KARMA
III. ASRAVA
IV. BANDHA
V. SAMVARA
VI. NIRJARA
VII. MOKSHA
VIII. STAGES ON THE PATH
IX. DHARMA IN PRACTICE
----- COMPARATIVE ANTIQUITY OF JAINISM
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

FORWARD
The late lamented Champat Rai Jain was a Bar-at-Law by profession; but he is
better remembered on account of his numerous publications in English as a
deep scholar of Comparative Religion. The Kew of Knowledge is his Magnum
Opus. His comprehensive study of Comparative Religion and his deep
understanding of Christianity and Islam he brought to bear on his study of
Jainism. The result has been remarkable. In fact he can be looked upon as one
of pioneers who introduced Jainism to the western world in a catching and
effective manner. We owe to him a number of books in English dealing with
the Householders Dharma, the Sannyasa Dharma, etc. His Practical Path or
Practical Dharma is a neat exposition of Jainism, as a way of life. The present
book Fundamentals of Jainism is based on the Practical Path of the late C. R.
Jain from which some portions are omitted. The opening Chapter gives what
can be called the method of understanding reality, or the AnekantaVada, which
is rightly called 'intellectual Ahimsa' of the Jainas. The subsequent chapters
give details about the fundamental principles of Jainism. They indicate how the
mundane spirit can get rid of the shackles of Karma and steadily attain spiritual
perfection following the stages on the path detailed here. The chapter dealing
with Dharma in practice lays out what needs to be followed day-to-today by
one who wants to lead a religious life.
This is indeed a useful book, which goes a long way to explain Jainism both to a
lay reader and to an earnest student of comparative religion. It is but natural,
therefore, that this brochure is blessed by Muni Shri Vidyanandaji.
The Publishers deserve our gratitude for its timely publication when we are
celebrating the 2500th Anniversary of the Nirvana of Bhagawan Mahavira.
University of Mysore
Mysore; October 2, 1974
A.N. Upadhye
"There is evidence to show that so far back as the first century B.C. there were
people who were worshipping Rishabh Deva, the first Tirthankara. There is no
doubt that Jainism prevailed even before Vardhamana or Parsvanath. The
Yajurveda mentions the names of three Tirthankaras---- Rishabha, Ajitnath and
Aristanemi. The Bhagavata Puran endorses the view that Rishabha was the
founder of Jainism."
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

Dr. S. Radhakrishnan
Indian Philosophy Vol. I, P. 287
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

Introduction
THE METHOD OF PHILOSOPHY (ANEKANTVAD)
The very first thing the follower of Jainism is required to impress upon his mind
is the fact that the path of salvation consists in Right Belief, Right Knowledge
and Right Conduct, called the three Jewels by the Jaina philosophers.
It is a self-evident truth that the successful achievement of an object of desire
depends on the scientific validity of the means employed for the purpose; and
equally evident is the fact that in all our pursuits and occupations we only
resort to those methods of securing the end in view which have a causal
connection with its accomplishment. The universal Law of Cause and Effect,
thus, is the determining factor of all human, that is to say rational, activity, and
it is obvious that nothing but confusion, disappointment and discomfiture, to
say nothing of the pain and suffering which inevitably follow the baffled
endeavors of mankind to secure some object of desire, can result from a
disregard of this self-evident truth. The truth is that chance has no voice in the
order of nature, and cannot be relied upon as a rational method of securing any
desired end.
The law of cause and effect also holds good in the region of spiritual science,
notwithstanding its emphatic denial by semi-trained theologians at times. For,
were it otherwise, spiritual emancipation would have to fall within the uncertain
domain of chance, and the method of the attainment of the ideal of the soul
would be deprived of its rational basis of efficacy, leaving mankind to grope in
the darkness of uncertainty and doubt by no means a happy predicament.
The necessity for right knowledge* (*It is interesting to note in this connection
that almost all the rational religions of the world also lay stress on the necessity
for knowledge as a pre-requisite of Moksha. Thus the "rite Janna na Mukti'
(no salvation without knowledge) of the Vedas is directly confirmed by 'Ye shall
know the truth, and the truth shall make you free' (John, VIII. 32) of Jesus,
and, implying at least by, 'he dieth not who giveth (his) life to learning' The
sayings of Muhammad) of the Prophet of Islam.) cannot, therefore, be
overrated. In respect of right belief also it is evident that it is essential to the
utility of knowledge, since belief signifies a cessation of doubt, and also since
people only live up to their beliefs. Right conduct also is a necessary condition
to the attainment of final emancipation, for no desired results are possible
without the doing of the right thing at the right moment.
The subject of inquiry, or knowledge, in so far as spiritual emancipation is
concerned resolves itself into the nature of that beatific condition and of the
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

causes, which stand in the way of its attainment. These in their turn involve the
nature of that beatific condition and of the causes, which stand in the way of its
attainment. These in their turn involve the nature of existing realities, or
substances, and their interaction. We thus get the following seven Tattvas
(essentials or objects of knowledge):
(1) Jiva (intelligence or living substance),
(2) Ajiva (matter and other non-intelligent substances),
(3) Asrava (the influx of karmic matter), (4) Bandha (bondage),
(5) Samvara (the stopping of Asrava),
(6) Nirjara (the gradual removal of karmic matter),
(7) Moksha (the attainment of perfect freedom).
The would-be aspirant for Moksha has to understand the nature of these
Tattvas, the knowledge of which is a condition precedent to the acquisition of
that well balanced state of mind, which is designated by the word belief or faith.
In this connection it is necessary to point out two of the pit-falls of philosophy
into which almost all the non- Jaina metaphysicians have fallen unconsciously.
The first one has reference to the idea of a beginning of the world process, and
the second relates to the philosophy of stand- points on which the greatest
stress has been laid by Jaina Acharyas.
THE METHOD OF PHILOSOPHY - WORLD PROCESS
In respect of the world-process, it is obvious to every thinking mind, that
philosophy is concerned with the determination of the nature of things, and that
the starting point of all rational speculation is the world of concrete reality
which is presented to the individual consciousness through the media of senses.
A philosopher takes, in the first instance, the world as he finds it, and aided by
the methods of analysis and research, reduces the perceptible phenomena to
their simpler components, so that when he arrives at simple elements, he knows
them to be the eternal causes of the ceaselessly shifting panorama of form and
shape, which constitutes our universe. Beyond these eternal causes or realities,
it is impossible to proceed, because being simple in their nature they cannot
depend, for their existence, on any thing else; in other words, their own
individual natures alone are the causes of their existence individually. It follows
from this that however far back we may go in time, no beginning of simple
elements can be discovered or conceived, so that we never arrive at a point in
the life-story of nature when they were not. This is a death blow to the idea of
a beginning, and its force will be felt by any one who seriously puts himself the
question: how can a simple (non-compound) substance be brought into
existence? It should be remembered that a simple substance, or reality, differs
from a compounded effect of simple elements in so far as it is not the product of
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

two or more substances, but is not analyzable, unbreakable, indestructible thing
in itself. Creation of these simple realities from pure nothing is out of the
question, because nothing is devoid of all qualities including existence and
substantiality.
If any one still wishes to adhere to the notion of a creation of all things from
naught, let him put to himself the question, how can the different elements
possibly owe their existence to one source? This would convince him that
`nothing' can never be turned into a concrete, substantial `something' by means
of any process whatsoever.
The conclusion we arrive at, then, is that the idea of a beginning of the elements
is not entertained in philosophy. Now, since there are no air-tight compartments
to keep these elements separate from each other, and since the world- process is
the result of the interaction and functioning of the different substances and
elements, it follows that no starting point can be discovered for a general
commencement of the universe. This amounts to saying that the idea of a
creation is altogether untenable in philosophy.
SAPTABHANGI SYSTEM
We now come to the philosophy of stand- points which is the first step in
scientific metaphysics. Any one who has at all bestowed a thought on the
nature of philosophy, must have arrived at the conclusion that it aims at the
perfection of knowledge to emancipate humanity from `the slavery of
superstition and awe of nature's might, and that knowledge itself signifies
nothing other than a sense of familiarity with the nature of things as they exist in
the world. Now, everything in nature exists in relation to a number of other
things, and is liable to be influenced by them in different ways. Besides, all
things present different aspects when looked at from the point of view of their
nature and when studied in respect of the forms they assume under the influence
of some other thing or things. Furthermore, when they are described by men,
they are generally described from a particular point of view, though the unwary
are led to imagine this one-sided description of their nature as exhaustive, many
even falling into the pitfall of logical 'suicide' by basing their deductions on a set
of rules or formulas which are applicable to facts gleaned from a particular
stand-point, but not to any other. We can observe for ourselves the nature of
confusion which is likely to result from an ignoring or mixing up of different
stand- points by means of the two following illustrations:
(1) Let us take for our first illustration the famous text, Jiva is Brahman (soul
of God), which certain people preach without the least possible qualification.
But obviously the statement is true only in so far as the natural qualities of the
soul are concerned; it is not true in respect of the present manifested condition
of an ordinary Jiva who must exert himself in the right direction to attain to his
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

natural purity. As water in its essence is pure gaseous matter, so is a Jiva, with
regard to his pure natural qualities, a perfect God; but as water, as water,
cannot be said to be air, so cannot a Jiva involved in the samsara be said to be
pure Brahman. This illustrates the effect of a one-sided absolutism of thought
which ignores all other points of view; and its far-reaching consequences can
be seen in the monistic speculations of certain philosophers who have based
their system of metaphysics on the natural attribute of the soul, altogether
ignoring the standpoint of evolution. These gentlemen, unable to explain the
different conditions of beings and things arising in the course of their evolution,
have actually found themselves forced to describe the world as an illusion, pure
and simple.
(2) Our second illustration is intended to emphasize the effect of confounding
the different standpoints. Suppose we say: 'Here is a jar of iron; if we remove
its iron-ness, it will cease to exist.' This is a perfectly true statement, as any
body can see for himself. But if we now say: `Here is a jar of x; if we remove
its x-ness, it must cease to exist.', the conclusion might be true in some cases,
and not in others, for x may represent only such non-essential qualities or things
as butter, or some living being's name. Obviously, a jar containing butter would
never cease to exist by the removal of its contents, nor would one belonging to
a person ever become a non-entity by changing hands' and yet it is perfectly
permissible, in speech, to say ' a jar of butter' and 'a jar of John'. This one
instance suffices to illustrate the nature of confusion, which is likely to result in
philosophy by indiscriminately mixing up, or confounding, the results of
research made from different points of view. `This is a jar of iron', is a
statement, which is true from the point of view called dravyarthika Naya, which
takes into consideration the substantive attributes of things, while `the jar of
butter', 'the bucket of John', and thee like, have no reference to the nature of
the substance or substances of which the jar or the bucket might be made, but
only describe them in respect of their contents or owner's name.
There are seven principal stand- points, which are employed by men in their
description of things. These are:
(1) Naigama (the non-distinguished) which describes things without
distinguishing between their general and special properties.
(2) Sangraha (the collective) which deals exclusively with the general qualities
of things.
(3) Vyavahar (the particular) is the standpoint of particularity. The difference
between the Sangraha and the Vyavahar Naya lies in the fact that while the
former describes things in respect of their general properties, the latter only
concerns it self with their particular attributes.
(4) Rijusutra (literally the straight, hence the immediate) studies things as they
exist in the present, and without regard to their past and future aspects.
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

(5) Sabda (literally the verbal, hence the point of view of a grammarian) pays
exclusive attention to number, gender, tense, etc., of the words employed.
(6) Sambhiruda is the stand- point of an etymologist who distinguishes between
synonymous words on etymological grounds.
(7) Evambhuta, literally such like, hence the point of view which describes
things by words expressing their special functions, e.g., to call a man a devotee
because of his being engaged in devotion.
These are the main kinds of Naya; and it is clear that each of them, taken by
itself, is insufficient to impart full knowledge of things, and has to be taken as
furnishing only partial information about their nature. They are current because
of the practical requirements of human intercourse and the usage of society,
which would be thrown into a state of chaos if lengthy descriptions were
insisted upon, instead of short words, to describe things. Philosophy, which
aims at the perfection of knowledge, however, cannot afford to follow the
conventions of men designed to expedite their intercourse with their fellow
beings, and must get hold of the actual truth by combining the results of
investigation made from different points of view. A thorough insight into the
philosophy of stand- points is also necessary to estimate the true value of the
statements of our predecessors in the field of metaphysical research. Mankind
would find, that almost all the confusion of thought, and we might also say the
animosity existing between the followers of different religions, would cease to
exist as soon as they would test the scriptural text which most of us blindly
adhere to with the aid of the touch-stone of Naya Vada (the philosophy of
stand-points). If they would only insert the word 'somehow' before any
scriptural or prophetic, statement, they would find their minds becoming trained
in the right direction to inquire into the stand-point of the prophet who made
any particular statement. The word somehow' (Syat is Sanskrit) would show
that the statement was made from a particular point of view, and would at once
direct the mind to find out what that stand-point is. It would also enable us to
reconcile many a seemingly contradictory statement in the scriptures of the
same creed as well as in those of different faiths; for it does often happen. that a
statement which is wrong from one particular point of view, is not so from
another, e.g., one observer might say that a bowl full of water contains no air,
both being right from their respective stand-points since water is only gaseous
matter in its essence though manifested in the form of a liquid substance owing
to the action of atoms of hydrogen and oxygen on one another.
For the above reason the Jaina Siddhanta insists on the employment of the
word Syat (somehow or from a particular point of view) before every judgment
or statement of fact, though in ordinary parlance and composition it is generally
dispensed with. There are three kinds of judgment, the affirmative, the negative
and the one, which gives expression to the idea of indescribability. Of these, the
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

first kind affirms and the second denies the existence of a quality, property or
thing, but the third declares an object to be indescribable. A thing is said to be
indescribable when both existence and non-existence are to be attributed to it at
one and the same time. These three forms of judgment give rise to seven
possible modes of predication, which are set out below:
(1) Syadasti (somehow, i.e., from some particular point of view, a thing may be
said to exist),
(2) Syannasti (somehow the thing does not exist),
(3) Syad asti nasty (affirmation of existence from one point of view and of
non-existence from another),
(4) Syadavaktavya (somehow the thing is indescribable),
(5) Syadasti avaktavya (a combination of the first and the fourth forms of
predication),
(6) yannasti avaktavya (a combination of the second and the fourth forms),
and
(7) Syadasti nasty avaktavya (a combination of the first, second and fourth
forms of judgment).
This sevenfold system of predication is called the Saptabhangi (literally, the
seven-branched), and stands in the same relation to philosophy as grammar does
to speech.
We shall now proceed to describe the fallacies of the seven kinds of Naya
(stand- points) enumerated above. These are also seven in number, that is to
say one for each Naya. Taken in the same order as their corresponding Naya,
they may be described as follows:
(1) Naigamabhasa, the fallacy of the Naigama Naya, consists in making an
actual division in thought between the general and special properties of things,
as for instance to speak of the existence and consciousness of a soul as if they
were two separate things.
(2) Sangrahabhasa occurs when we describe the general properties of a thing
as constituting it solely. For instance it is incorrect to maintain that a tree can
be constituted by the general qualities common to all trees, since an actual tree
will have to be a particular kind of tree, and not the idea of tree-ness in general.
(3) Vyavaharabhasi consists in making a wrong division of species.
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

(4) Rijusutrabhasa arises when we deny the permanence of things altogether.
Those philosophers who hold that there is no "being" but only "becoming" in
the world have fallen into this kind of error.
(5) Sabdabhasa occurs when we deal with words without regard to their
number, gender, tense, etc. For instance, to take the Hebrew Elohim, which is
pluralistic in form, as representing one individual Being would be an error of the
Sabdabhasa type.
(6) Sambhirudabhasa lies in treating apparently synonymous words, which
possess nice distinctions of meaning as if they all meant exactly the same thing.
Pride and conceit may be taken to be fairly good instances of words, which if
taken to mean exactly the same mental trait, would give rise to this fallacy.
(7) Evambhutabhasa lies in asserting that the existence of a thing depends on
its performance of the particular function with reference to which alone it has
been described, as for instance to say that a devotee is non-existent because he
is no longer engaged in devotion.
The nature of the Naya and the Saptabhangi system of predication having been
shown, we now proceed to a general consideration of the Tattvas.
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

THE TATTVAS
The first two of the Tattvas deal with the nature and enumeration of the eternal
realities, elements or substances of nature, and the remaining five with the
interaction between two of these substances, namely, soul, or spirit, and matter.
There are six simple substances in existence, namely, Spirit, Matter, Time,
Space, Dharma and Adharma. Of theses spirit or soul-substance, called Jiva in
Jainism, is to be distinguished from the remaining five, called Ajiva, on account
of the quality of intelligence with which it is endowed and of which the other
substances are devoid. A substance is to be distinguished from a body or thing,
in as much as the former is a simple element or reality while the latter is a
compound of one or more substances or atoms. There may be a partial or total
destruction of a body or thing, but no substance can ever be annihilated.
Substance is the substrate of qualities which cannot exist apart it, for instance
the quality of fluidity, moisture, and the like only exist in water and cannot be
conceived separately from it. It is neither possible to create nor to destroy a
substance, which means that there never was a time when the existing
substances were not, nor shall they ever cease to be. From another point of
view substance is the subject of modifications. Every substance has its
characteristic function, as for instance the special function of Jiva is to know.
Every substance is either atomic, that is composed of atoms, or is only one,
indivisible expanse of existence. Dharma, Adharma and Space have no parts in
their structure, that is to say are non-atomic, while Jiva, Matter and Time
consist of an infinite number of individuals, atoms and units respectively. There
is an infinity of Jivas (souls) each of which is an individual in its own self, and
possesses the potentiality of perfect or right faith, unlimited knowledge, infinite
happiness and absolute power. Its nature is freedom which, when obtained,
becomes the source of its great joy. In its modifications, it is the subject of
knowledge and enjoyment, or suffering, in varying degree, according to its
circumstances. The soul is not possessed of sensible qualities, and cannot be
perceived with the senses. It has no permanent form of its own till it attains
nirvana, when its form becomes fixed once for all and for ever. Like a
semi-fluid jelly, it assumes the form of the body in which it might happen to be
in soul for the time being.
Matter is a non-intelligent substance consisting of an infinity of particles or
atoms, which are eternal. These atoms are possessed of sensible qualities,
namely, taste, smell, color, and sparse* , (*Sparse means touch which is of
eight kinds) , and sound also arises from their agitation in certain forms. Atoms
form the material basis of all kinds of physical bodies from the most sukshma
(subtle) to the grossest. They also combine with the soul when they obstruct its
natural properties, thereby holding it in bondage.
Time is the cause of continuity and succession. It is of two kinds, Nishchay and
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

Vyavahar. The former of these is a substance, which makes simple units
revolve on themselves, thus giving rise to the idea of progress or change in the
same place, that is continuity; but the latter in only the measure of duration, and
depends on the succession of regularly recurring events of a universal type.
Dharma and Adharma are the two substances, which are helpful in the motion
and stationary states of things respectively, the former enabling them to move
from place to place and the latter to come to rest from the condition of motion.
Space is the substance which finds room for all other substances and things.
Four of these substances, namely, Time, Space, Dharma and Adharma, though
necessary for the world-process, play no important part in the scheme of
spiritual evolution. We shall, therefore, pass on to a consideration of the nature
of the interaction between spirit and matter, without stopping to describe the
remaining substances any further.
THE NATURE OF KARMA (Karma ka swroop)
EMANCIPATION FROM BONDAGE
When Jesus of Nazareth propounded the proposition* (*See John, VII. 32) "Ye
shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free."
His interlocutors failed to understand the nature of freedom, which the
knowledge of truth was to carry to their hearts. It was their ignorance of the
nature of spiritual bondage, which prevented them from grasping the true sense
of the messianic observation. They looked upon freedom from only the political
point of view, and had never thought of the true or spiritual freedom with which
religion mainly concerns itself. They had then to be told, that freedom signified
emancipation from the bondage of sin, but it is not clear, whether they fully
comprehended the messianic speech even then, for even today it is difficult to
believe that the full significance of the terms freedom and bondage has been
adequately grasped by the humanity at large. Be this as it may, the important
question for us is not whether the interlocutors and followers of Jesus
understood his purpose or not, but what is the true significance of the terms
freedom and bondage in the science of religion?
It is obvious that there is no concrete substance or thing to correspond to the
word sin when used as a noun; the word expresses a pure mental abstraction,
and conveys the idea of wrong- doing. The bondage of sin, thus, is clearly the
thralldom of actions, i.e., karmas (actions or deeds), which is to be shaken off
in order to bring the state of natural freedom of the soul into manifestation.
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

THEORY OF TRANSMIGRATION
It must be borne in mind that there can be no bondage to pure mental
abstractions, or purely wordy concepts; the word signifies some kind of real
fetters, not, indeed, consisting of chains of iron, but of a very subtle and
invisible material. It is well to know that nothing but force, in some form or
other, is capable of holding things in the condition of slavery, and that no kind
of force can be conceived apart from a substance or material of some sort. The
bondage of sin must, then, be a bondage of `matter, and the obtainment of
freedom must consequently imply the destruction of bonds and the removal of
the particles of foreign matter from the constitution of the soul.
This is precisely what is implied in the theory of transmigration, which
undoubtedly, was well known to and accepted by every rational religion in the
past. It is, however, in Jainism alone that we find it placed on a scientific
foundation, and though the scriptures of other creeds contain allusions to it,
these allusions are nearly always couched in mystic or unintelligible language
and are never explained on lines of rational or scientific thought. This is one of
the facts which explain the reason why the followers of certain religions,
including Christianity, do not now accept the doctrine of re-birth, and range
themselves against the creeds which preach it.
That the theory of transmigration is a truth of philosophy will be readily
acknowledged by any one who would study the nature of the soul and of the
causes upon which depends its ensoulment in a body of matter. As regards to
the former, that is the nature of the soul, it is sufficient to state that the qualities
of feeling, willing and knowing, which are the special attributes of
consciousness, are not to be found in matter, and must, for that reason be the
property of a substance which differs in toto from it. The simplicity of the soul
is proved by the fact that no one ever feels himself as many, which shows that
the subject of knowledge, feeling, perception and memory is not a reality
composed of many atoms or parts, but a simple individuality. Soul, then, is a
reality, which is not indebted to any other substance for its existence, and as
such must be deemed to be eternal and uncreated. This amounts to saying, that
the line of existence of every soul merges in infinity both in the past and the
future, so that each and every living being has a history of his own, however
much he might be ignorant of the events of his earlier lives in his present
incarnation.
In respect of the causes of the ensoulment of a Jiva in the body of matter, it is
to be observed that in its natural purity the soul is the enjoyer of perfect
wisdom, unlimited perception, infinite power and unbounded happiness, which,
in the absence of a restraining force or body of some kind, must be deemed to
be manifested in the fullest degree in its nature. The idea of such a perfect
being descending to inhabit a body of flesh and thereby crippling its natural
unlimited perfection, in a number of ways, is too absurd to be entertained for a
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

moment. It follows from this that the soul did not exist in a condition of
perfection prior to its present incarnation, and that the existence of some force
capable of dragging Jivas into different wombs is a condition precedent to their
birth in the several grades of life. But how shall we conceive force operation on
soul and dragging it into an organism, if not as the action of some kind of
matter? It is, therefore, clear that the soul must have been in union with some
kind of matter prior to its birth in any given incarnation.
So far as the nature of matter which is found in union with the soul in its
pre-natal state is concerned, it most obviously must be of a very sukshma(fine)
quality, since the fertilized ovum, which roughly speaking, is the starting point
of the life of an organism is itself a very minute, microscopic structure. The
body of this fine material, called the Karman sartor (the body of karmic
matter), in technical language of the Jaina Siddhanta, is the cause and
instrument of transmigration, and, along with the one called `the taijasa* sarira
(body of radiant wonder), (*The electric body taijasa arira is a necessary link
between the other two bodies of the soul- the Karma and the audarika, the
body of the gross matter. The necessity for a link of this kind is to be found in
the fact that the matter of the Karman sarira is too sukshma fine and that of
the audarika too gross to allow any direct or immediate interaction between
them and that an intermediate type of matter is required to connect them with
each other.) is a constant companion of the soul in all its different forms
assumed in the course of its evolution in the samsara. Both these bodies
undergo changes of form from time to time, there by leading to different kinds
of births; they are destroyed only when Moksha is attained, which means perfect
freedom of the soul from all kinds of matter.
The necessity for the existence of the shuttle body Karman sarira would also
become clear by taking into consideration the effect its absence would have on
the soul of a dead man, i.e. a disembodied spirit. Obviously the absence of all
kinds of limiting and crippling influences would at once enable such a
disembodied soul to manifest its natural perfection in the fullest degree, making
it the equal of Gods and the enjoying of the supreme status of Paramatma
(god) at a stroke. Death, then, instead of being the dreaded foe, as it is
considered now, would be the greatest benefactor of all kind of living beings,
and the attainment of supreme bliss, to say nothing of omniscience,
omnipotence, and all those other divine qualities and powers which men
associate with their gods, would be possible with the greatest ease, not only to
every virtuous Jiva, but to every rogue, rascal and sinner as well. Even the act
of murdering a fellow being would have to be regarded as a highly meritorious
deed, and suicide acclaimed as the shortest cut to the heaven of the highest
divinity. Dogs and cats and the whole host of creeping things and the like
would also, on such a supposition, find their differences of development
abolished at a stroke. The path of salvation, too, would no longer consist in
Right Faith, Right Knowledge and Right Conduct, but would lie on the point of
the butcher's knife or through the friendly grave of a cannibal's stomach.
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

The absurdity of the proposition need not be dilated upon any further; it is a
sufficient refutation of the notion that death effects a complete severance
between spirit and matter, and shows that the Karman sarira never leaves the
soul till perfection is attained. The question, when was the Karman shareer
formed for the first time does not arise; it could only arise on the supposition
that a perfectly pure spirit had descended or condescended to enter into
bondage, but this has been already seen to be an non- entertainable hypothesis.
It follows from this that all the souls now involved in bond --and their number is
infinite-- have always been in an impure and imperfect state. There is nothing
surprising in this conclusion, `for just as gold is found in a mine in an impure
condition without any one having ever deposited the pure metal there, so are
souls to be taken as having existed in a condition of impurity from all eternity.
The only possible counter-hypothesis of the renewal of bondage by the order of
any extra-supreme God is met by the argument that there can be no possible
ground for distinction between one pure spirit and another. Since the qualities
of substances do not vary to suit individual whims, all pure spirits must possess
the same attributes. Hence, there can be no such thing as a God of Gods. On
the other hand, if it be said that the Supposed extra supreme body is a pure
spirit plus some thing else, that would make his being a compounded organism
which experience and observation prove to be liable to disintegration and decay.
Furthermore, a perfect God must be presumed to be above longings of every
kind, and cannot, therefore, be credited with the unholy desire of imposing
fetters of pain and misery on his brethren.
Lastly, when we look into the nature of this extra- supreme deity of modern
theology we only discover him to be personification of karmic energy and
power. It has been made clear in 'the key of Knowledge' that the gods and
goddesses of the several systems of theology which are flourishing in our midst
today are only the personifications* certain mental abstractions and forces of a
psychic or occult type. (*See also 'The Permanent History of Bharata Varsha',
by K. Narayana Iyer.) If the reader has read that book, he would not find it
difficult to understand that the following passages disclose the attributes of the
karmic force, the regulator of the destinies of all kind of beings involved in the
samsara, rather that the qualities of a perfectly blissful being such as a Siddha
Atma (perfect Soul) must necessarily be:
(1) "I create ....evil." --Isaiah, XLV. 7.
(2) "Wherefore I gave them statutes that were not good, and judgments
whereby they should not live." --Ezekiel, XX.25.
(3) "It repented the Lord that he had made man on earth and it grieved him at
his heart." --Genesis, VI 6.
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

(4) "Whosoever slayeth Cain vengeance shall be taken on him sevenfold."
--Genesis, IV,15.
(5) "I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers
upon the children unto the third and fourth generations of them that hate me.'
--Deut. V.9
We could cite many other similar passages from the scriptures, but it would
serve no useful purpose to multiply authorities. So far as the Vedas are
concerned, they are intelligible only on the hypothesis of a wholesale
personification of occult powers and metaphysical abstractions. The Hindu
Puranas even attribute deception to their godhead, such as his appearing in the
form of a beautiful female at the churning of the ocean, where he not only
prevented the Asura from drinking the nectar of immortality by making them
fall in love with his female form, but also immediately slew Rahu, who,
perceiving the fraud that was being practiced, had managed to secure a drop of
the life-giving amrita (nectar of life).
None of these attributes are appropriate to the godhead, but they are fully in
harmony with the personification of karma, as the lord or master of the
destinies of living beings. The word Ishvara, the popular name of the deity in
Hinduism, only signifies, in its literal sense, powerful, able, capable, hence, a
lord or master.
The truth of the matter is that the moderns have completely lost sight of the fact
that the theological god, or Ishvara, is a pure impersonation of karma, and,
therefore, feel baffled in the presence of such statements as those already
quoted from the Bible and the Quran. It is this impersonation of karmic power,
as the ruler of the world, which stands in the way of progress by demoralizing
the hearts of men with unholy superstition and awe of his supreme sway,
irresistible might and vindictive unforgiving nature.
To revert to the point under consideration, it is now clear that a pure spirit
cannot possibly be compelled to re- enter the bondage of 'sin' when once it has
attained to perfection, and that the condition of none of the souls now involved
in the samsara has ever been that of perfect purity at any time in the past.
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

ASRAVA
Asrava signifies the influx of matter into the constitution of a soul. As
Moksha cannot be attained without the removal of the last particle of matter
from the soul, knowledge of the process which causes the inflow of fresh matter
and of the means to check it with is a necessity which cannot be exaggerated.
Every action that is performed by living being in the samsara is always
in relation to some kind of matter. Whether we enter into intercourse with the
outside world through the media of senses, or indulge in mental or moral
speculation in the seclusion of our private apartments, or carry on any other
kind of activity, in each and every instance we only traffic in matter some of
which is being constantly absorbed by the soul. Even when fresh matter does
not come from outside, there is always a sufficient amount of it present in the
physical organism itself to be absorbed by the soul. Every action opens the
door to certain kinds of particles of matter, which may immediately enter into
union with the soul, and modify the structures of its two invisible bodies, the
Karman and the taijasa. This is the case generally with all kinds of actions.
Even when meritorious deeds, short of the natural functioning of pure spirit, are
performed, there is no stoppage of the process of the karmic influx; only the
soul then assimilates particles of matter whose fruit is pleasant, instead of those,
which bear evil consequences. For the difference between virtue and vice is
precisely the same as that between a gold and an iron chain; they both tend to
prolong the bondage of the soul though in one case it is not quite unpleasant,
while in the other it may be, and, in the worst cases, actually is, intolerable. The
natural functioning (self-contemplation) of pure spirit differs from Punya
(virtue) in so far that while the exercising of the functions of pure spirit does
not imply the negativity of the soul in the least degree, and, therefore, is
unaccompanied by the Asrava of matter, virtuous actions are only calculated to
render captivity pleasant and agreeable to the soul. Thus, virtue is as much a
cause of bondage as vice from the stand-point of him, who aspires for perfect
liberation.
Certain types of mental attitude strikingly demonstrate the operation and effect
of Asrava on the soul. Such, for instance, is the case with mental depression
when the soul is literally weighted down by a kind of sukshma (fine) particles of
matter. The same is the case with excessive grief, a general tendency towards
pessimism, and the like. What seems to happen in such cases is that certain
kinds of feelings weaken the intensity of the rhythm of the soul, exposing it to
the influx of the particles of matter from its physical organism itself. As an oily
surface soon becomes covered over with dust, so does the soul attract to itself
and is depressed (from pre-down, and pressum to press) by a large number of
particles of matter from within its own outer encasement of flesh. It is to be
borne in mind that the soul's association with the outer body of gross matter is
not of the same type as that with the Karman Shareer, for while it becomes
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

intimately fused with the particles of finer matter of which that subtle body is
made, there is no such fusion in the case of the gross body. The idea of the
association of the soul with its three bodies may be partially grasped by likening
it to oxygen and the matter of the Karman sarira to hydrogen which combine
together to form water. If we now throw some coloring matter into the liquid,
formed by the fusion of hydrogen and oxygen, we should have an idea of the
form of the taijasa Shareer. The position occupied by these two bodies in
relation to that of gross matter is something like that which comes into
existence by holding the volume, or mass, of colored liquid in a sponge, so that
the liquid saturates every portion of the sponge without actually becoming
fused or united with it. There is, however, this important, distinction to be
drawn between the sponge and the physical organism that while the former is an
independent article, the latter is only organized by the soul which is to become
en-soul in it.
To return to the influx of matter into the soul, the idea of Asrava through the
senses can be easily understood if we put ourselves the question: who feels the
sensations of taste, smell, color, touch and sound which are received through
sense-organs? Is it, for instance, the tongue that enjoys the relish of food, or
the soul? Obviously the soul; for if its attention is exclusively engaged
elsewhere it is not only not conscious of the taste of food but may also fail to
take conscious cognizance of the quality of eatable put before it. It follows
from this that while the bulk food passes into the stomach through the gullet,
some finer particles of its relish reach the soul through the glands of taste and
the nerves connected with them, enabling it to feel and enjoy the taste of each
morsel. Hence, when these relish-particles do not come in contact with the soul
it is not cognizant of their presence. The same is the case with the feelings of
pain and pleasure and with the bodily sensations in general; these, too, are not
felt if the mind is busy elsewhere. These facts unmistakably point to some kind
of material Asrava with every sensation and feeling. The same conclusion is to
be arrived at by a study of certain kinds of mental states, for the process of
controlling such passions as anger, greed, and the like, clearly points to the
exertion of will on some kind of matter, while their complete eradication means
neither more or less than a complete annihilation of their causes, i.e., the
freedom of mind from some kind of foreign material whose presence was
responsible for their existence and recurring recrudescence. Whether we regard
our passions and emotions as the states of our consciousness or as so many
kinds of rhythms of the soul, or in any other way, it is certain that a simple
substance like the soul or consciousness can never, by itself, be the basis of so
many different kinds of states of rhythms some of which are undoubtedly
antagonistic to one another. Hatred and love both, for instance, cannot be the
natural functions of the soul, so that if the latter be the normal state of our
consciousness, the former must owe its existence to something else. Matter,
the only other substance which enters into interaction with the soul, then, is the
substance whose influence is responsible for the abnormal types of emotions
and passions. Its fusion with spirit gives rise to disposition, and renders the
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

soul liable to experience different kinds of affections according to the varying
circumstances of life. The two opposite types of feelings known as de-light
(literally, intense lightness) and depression (mental 'heaviness'), also furnish
strong evidence in support of Asrava, for the former conveys the idea of the
removal of a kind of weight from the soul, while its antithesis, the latter, implies
the imposition of some sort of burden on it. Hence, if our language is to be true
to nature, we must acknowledge that it is not purely the weight of words, ideas
or circumstances which makes us experience the unpleasant feeling known as
depression of spirits, nor the cessation or removal there of which serves as an
occasion for delight.
The truth is that when the soul becomes negative in consequence of some
ungratified desire, it is exposed to the Asrava of matter in a marked degree,
and, consequently, feels de-pressed in the literal sense of the word. Similarly,
when its desires are gratified, or voluntarily abandoned, its condition of
negativity comes to an end, and some of the particles of matter, which had
flowed in on account of the slackening of the intensity of the rhythm of life, are
mechanically dispersed, giving rise to the feeling of de- light.
As a result of the foregoing discussion, it may be stated that Asrava always
signifies the influx of matter into the substance of the soul, and that the soul
remains subject to it so long as the rhythm of life remains slackened by the
attitude of receptivity,. This is due to the influence of desires for material thing,
for the soul is perfection itself in its natural purity, but the entertainment of
desires leads it to depend on the objects thereof, throwing it into an attitude of
expectancy and uneasiness. Pure intelligence by nature, the Jiva is affected by
its beliefs, so that the expectation of joy, comfort or help from outside itself
instantly impairs its natural buoyancy and strength. It is this condition of
expectancy, which may be called receptivity or negativity. This harmful
attitude, as stated before, is forced on the soul in consequence of its desires for
intercourse with, and traffic in, matter from which it expects to derive pleasure,
or joy, in some form or other. In reality, however, the soul is perfect and blissful
by nature, so that its desires for the enjoyment of matter only betray its
ignorance of its own true natural perfection. Thus, any kind of activity, physical,
mental or moral, is a cause of Asrava, no exception being made even in the case
of actions performed carelessly, since they point to the presence of an attitude
of carelessness which is quite incompatible with self-consciousness.
The causes of Asrava may now be enumerated categorically. They are:--
(1) Mithyatv, i.e., wrong belief or faith
(2) Avirati, i.e. moral failings,
(3) Pramad, i.e., negligent conduct, or lack of control,
(4) Kashaya, or passions, and
(5) Yoga, or the general channels of inflow.
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

Of these, the first class consists of five kinds of mithyatv, namely,
(i) One-sided absolutism, which insists on the absolute accuracy of knowledge
obtained from one point of view alone;
(ii) Untrue attribution of a quality to a being or thing;
(iii) Entertainment of doubt about the truth;
(iv) Failure to distinguish between right and wrong; and
(v) The notion that all religions are equally true.
The second division includes:
(i) Hinsa, that is, injuring another by thought, word or deed,
(ii) Falsehood or perjury,
(iii) Theft,
(iv) No chastity, and
(v) Attachment to things of the world.
The third category comprises:
(i) Reprehensible discourse about the king, state, women and food,
(ii) Sense-gratification,
(iii) Mild kind of passions,
(iv) Sleep, and
(v) Gossip.
The kasha's include four different types of anger, pride, deceitfulness and greed,
and nine minor blemishes (no- kasayas), namely, joking, attachment or live,
aversion or hatred, grief, fear, disgust and the three kinds of sexual passion
peculiar to the three sexes, the male, the female and the neuter. The four types
of kasayas are:
(1) Anantanubandhi, i.e., that which prevents one's acquiring the right faith and
stand in the way of true discernment;
(2) Apratyakhyana, or that which prevents the observance of even the minor
vows of a house-holder;
(3) Pratyakhyana, which interferes with the observance of the vrata (vows)
enjoined on a monk; and
(4) Sanjvalana, which is of a mild nature, and the last obstacle to the absolute
purity of Right Conduct.
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

Yoga, which means a channel for the inflow of matter, is of three kinds--
(i) Manoyoga, that is, mental activity, or thought,
(ii) Kayayoga, or bodily actions, and
(iii) Vachanayoga, i.e., speech.
These are the main causes of Asrava, and, although the
subheads in this classification may be divided still further, it would serve no
useful purpose to describe their minute sub-division here.
BANDHA
It must be obvious to all thinking minds that every slight contact of matter with
spirit does not necessarily imply their fusion, so that all the particles of matter
which come in contact with the soul do not necessarily combine with it to cause
its bondage. Hence, the Jaina Siddhanta divides bondage into two classes,
samprayika and iryapatha. Of these, the former signifies the fusion of spirit
and matter, and the latter only a momentary contact between them.
The absorption of matter by the soul result in the formation of a compound-
personality in which the natural attributes of spirit become suppressed to a
greater or less extent, according to the nature and quantity of the particles
absorbed. Just as hydrogen and oxygen are deprived of their natural freedom
during the period of their fusion in the form of water, so is a soul debarred from
the full exercise of its natural attributes while in union with matter; and just as
the separation of hydrogen and oxygen from one another results in restoring to
them their natural properties in the fullest degree of manifestation, so does the
removal of matter from the constitution of the soul establish it in its natural
perfection as a pure spirit. It follows from this that the union of spirit and
matter does not imply a complete annihilation of their natural properties in the
fullest degree of manifestation, so does the removal of matter from the
constitution of the soul establish it in its natural perfection as a pure spirit. It
follows from this that the union of spirit and matter does not imply a complete
annihilation of their natural properties, but only a suspension of their functions,
in varying degree, according to the quality and quantity of the material
absorbed. Thus, the effect of the fusion of spirit and matter is manifested in the
form of a compound- personality which partakes of the nature of both, without
actually destroying either. Hence, the Jiva involved in the cycle of births and
deaths manifests something of the nature of both, pure spirit and matter, the
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

quality of omniscience appearing in the form of knowledge dependent on the
activity of senses and mind, that of right belief in the form of wrong and absurd
notions, of infinite power in the guise of bodily prowess, and of infinite
happiness, as sensations of pleasure and pain through the senses. On the other
hand, attraction and repulsion, which are the properties of matter, assume the
form of attachment and hatred, giving rise to al kinds of emotions and passions,
greed, anger and the like. Another effect of the unhappy union between spirit
and matter is the liability to death from which pure spirit is perfectly immune,
but which, together with its companion, birth, is a constant source of dread to
an un-evolved, that is to say, an un- emancipated soul. The fusion of spirit and
matter also exposes the soul to danger from another quarter from which it
enjoys complete immunity as pure spirit. This additional source of trouble
consists in the inflow of fresh matter in consequence of the operation of the
forces of magnetism, chemical affinity and the like, residing in the material
already in union with the soul. As gaseous matter is not liable to combine with
the element of earth in its natural purity, but becomes defiled by it when existing
in the condition of water, so, owing to the influence of the material already in
combination with it, does the soul become liable to be forced into union with
certain types of matter which cannot assail it directly.
We thus observe that the union of soul and matter is simply fraught with
evil for the Jiva, whose condition scarcely differs from that of a man thrown
into prison and thereby deprived of his freedom of action. The Karma Shareer
is a sort of self-adjusting prison for the soul and constantly accompanies it
through all its incarnations, or births. Subject to modification at the end of each
form of life, it is again and again attracted into a new womb, organizing,
mechanically, the outer encasement of gross matter by the energies inherent
within its own form.
Thus the conditioning of the physical body, and of the circumstances depending
on that body- descent, family, status, wealth and the like- is the result of the
mechanical operation of the force of karma stored up in the Karma Shareer.
This karmic force is dealt with by the Jaina Siddhanta under the
following eight heads:
(1) Jnana varaniya, or the knowledge -obstructing group;
(2) Darsana varaniya, or the class of forces which interfere with
perception;
(3) Vedaniya, i.e., the class of prakriti (energies) which determine and
regulate the experiencing of pleasure and pain;
(4) Mohaniya, that is to say, the forces which produce delusion;
(5) Ayu, or the prakriti which determine the duration of the association
of the soul with the body of gross matter;
(6) Nama, or the forces which organize the body and its limbs;
(7) Gotra, or the energies which determine the family, surroundings,
position and the like, of individuals; and
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

(8) Antaraya, or the group of forces which interfere with our doing
what we should like to do.
As flesh, blood, muscles, bones, marrow and the like are formed from
the same food, so are the different kinds of karmic energies engendered from
the particles of matter absorbed by the soul through Asrava.
Of these eight kinds of karmas, the first, second, fourth and eight are
called Ghatia (lit. that which destroys), because they obstruct the natural
qualities of spirit, and the remaining four Aghatia (a = not + Ghatia) because of
their not interfering with those attributes. The formers are, moreover, regarded
as inimical to the Jiva, because they are the most difficult to be destroyed, while
the latter can be burnt up speedily.
We now proceed to describe the number and nature of energies
comprised in each of these eight groups of Karmas.
I. The Jnana varaniya class comprises five energies, namely;
(i) That which obscures knowledge derived through the senses (Mati Jnana);
(1)
(ii) That which interferes with knowledge based on the interpretation of signs
(Sruta Jnana); (2)
(iii) That which obstructs clairvoyance (Avadhi Jnana); (3)
(iv) That which debars one from telepathic knowledge (mana Paryaya Jnana);
(4) and
(v) That which prevents omniscience (Kevala Jnana) from manifesting itself.
(5)
II. The darsana varaniya group consists of the following nine kinds of
energy all of which interfere with the perceptive faculties of the soul in different
ways:--
(i) That which debars the soul from seeing with the eye (khakis darsana); (6)
(ii) That which prevents perception through senses other than sight (achaksu
darsana); (7)
(iii) That which obstructs clairvoyant perception (Avadhi darsana); (8)
(iv) That which prevents the manifestation of Kevala darsana (full, unqualified
perception); (9)
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

(v) Nidra (sleep); (10)
(vi) Nidra- Nidra (deep-sleep); (11)
(vii) Prachala, light or restless sleep, like that of a dog; (12)
(viii) Prachala-prachala, a more restless form of slumber than the preceding,
also a kind of madness; (13) and
(ix) Styana griddi (somnambulism). (14)
III. The Vedaniya type comprises two kinds of energies:
(i) Those responsible for pleasurable experiences (Sata Vedaniya), and (15)
(ii) Those leading to suffering and pain (Asata Vedaniya). (16)
IV. The Mohaniya class is subdivided into:
(i) Darsana Mohaniya, which obstructs right belief.
It is of three kinds:
(a) Mithyatva which leads to settled wrong beliefs, (17)
(b) Samyag Mithyatva which is characterized by mixture of truth and falsehood,
(18) and
(c) Samyag prakriti or samyaktva which signifies blurred faith. It this state the
truth is known, but faith is slightly tinged with superstition. (19)
(ii) Charitra Mohaniya which interferes with right conduct.
This is of the following twenty-five kinds:
Made of two groups Kashaya and no-kashaya.
Kashaya are of four types:
First, Anantanubandhi, that is, the most intense type.
(a) Anger, (20)
(b) Pride, (21)
(c) Deceit, (22)
(d) Greed, (23)
Second, Apratyakhyana, or a very, intense type.
(e) Anger, (24)
(f) Pride, (25)
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

(g) Deceit, (26)
(h) Greed, (27)
Third, Pratyakhyana, that is intense type.
(i) Anger, (28)
(j) Pride, (29)
(k) Deceit, (30)
(l) Greed, (31)
Fourth, sanjvalana, or mild type
(m) Anger, (32)
(n) Pride, (33)
(o) Deceit, (34)
(p) Greed, (35)
And, No-kasayas are:
(q) Joking, (36)
(r) Attachment or love, (37)
(s) Aversion, (38)
(t) Grief, (39)
(u) Fear, (40)
(v) Disgust, (41)
(w) Sex-passion peculiar to males, (42)
(x) Sex-passion peculiar to females, and (43)
(y) sex-passion peculiar to those of the neuter sex. (44)
V. The Ayu karma group includes four kinds of energies, which control
and determine the duration of life of the four kinds of beings, namely,
(i) Devas (residents of heavens), (45)
(ii) Human beings, (46)
(iii) Lower forms of life belonging to the animal, vegetable and
mineral kingdoms, (47) and
(iv) Denizens of hells. (48)
VI. The Nama karma group comprises the following ninety-three kinds
of energies falling under forty-two heads, which are responsible for the
formation of the different kinds of bodies and their organs:
(1) Gati or condition of existence which is of four kinds, namely,
(i) Manushya (human) (49)
(ii) Tiryanchas (lower forms of life, such as animals, vegetables and
the like), (50)
(iii) Deva (life in heavens), (51) and
(iv) Nark (the condition of existence as a resident of hell) (52)
(2) Jati, that is, type of class, which comprises the following five heads:
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

(i)One-sensed beings, (53)
(ii) Two-sensed beings, (54)
(iii) Three-sensed beings, (55)
(iv) Four-sensed beings, (56)
(v) Beings with all the five senses. (57)
(3) Shareer, i.e., body, which is of five kinds viz.,
(i) Audarika, the outer body of gross matter,
(58)
(ii) Vaikriyaka, the outer body of Devas (residents of heavens),
and of those who are the denizens of hells, (59)
(iii) Aharaka, an invisible body of small dimensions, which, issues from the
forehead of advanced ascetics alone, and enables them to visit the
Teacher, if there be one in a distant land, (60)
(iv)Taijasa, the body of luminous matter, (61) and
(v) Karma, the body of karmic energies. (62)
(4) Angopanga, that, is the principal and subsidiary limbs, which are of three
kinds--
(i) Audarika., i.e., pertaining to the physical body, (63)
(ii)Vaikriyaka, pertaining to the Vaikriyaka sarira which can become big or
small, and assume any form at will, and (64)
(iii) Aharaka, i.e., pertaining to the Aharaka body.(65)
(5) Nirmana, that is symmetry. (66)
(6) Bandanna, or union of articles without which it would be impossible for the
body to be organized. This is five kinds corresponding to the five kinds of
bodies enumerated above. (67-71)
(7) Sanghata, a still closer union of particles than bandana. (72-76)
This is also different for the five different kinds of bodies, hence, of five
types.
(8) Sansathana, or development which is of six kinds, as follows:
(i) Samachaturasra, i.e. proportionate, (77)
(ii) Nyagrodha parimandala, that is, well- developed in the upper
parts and ill- formed in the lower, (78)
(iii) Svatika, or well-formed in the lower portion, but stunted in the
upper, (79)
(iv) Kubjaka, that is, hunch-backed, (80)
(v) Varana, or dwarfish, (81) and
(vi) Hundaka, that is, general mal-formation. (82)
(9) Sanghanana, or formation of bony skeleton. This is of the following six
kinds, of which only the last three are possible in the present age:
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

(i) Vajra vrisabha narrate, that is, adamantine, or iron-like
formation of bones, their wrappings and nails. (83)
(ii) Vajra Naracha, i.e. iron-like formation of bones and nails, but not
of wrappings, or bandages, (84)
(iii) Naracha, or bones, wrappings, and nails of the ordinary type,
that is to say, without adamantine strength, (85)
(iv) Ardha Naracha, that is, no wrappings, but only partially nailed
joints, (86)
(v)Kilaka or wholly nailed joints, (87) and
(vi) Asamprapta sripatika, that is, bones strung together by nerves,
but not fixed with nails. (88)
(10) Color (Varna) which is of five kinds, viz.
(i) Black, (89)
(ii) Blue, (90)
(iii) Red, (91)
(iv) Yellow, (92) and
(v) White. (93)
(11) Smell (Gandha), which is either--
(i) Pleasant, (94) or
(ii) Unpleasant, (95)
(12) Taste (Rasa), which is of five kinds, namely
(i) Pungent, (96)
(ii) Bitter, (97)
(iii) Saline, (98)
(iv) Acid, (99) and
(v) Sweet, (100)
(13) Touch (spars), which falls under eight heads as follows:
(i) Hard, (101)
(ii) Soft, (102)
(iii) Light, (103)
(iv) Heavy, (104)
(v) Cold, (105)
(vi) Hot, (106)
(vii) Smooth, (107) and
(viii) Rough, (108)
(14) Anupurvi, which enables the soul to retain during the moments of
transition from one life to another the form of its last incarnation. This is of
four kinds, corresponding to the four gait's (conditions of existence), namely:
(i) Human, (109)
(ii)Deva, (110)
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

(iii)Nark (pertaining to the residents of hells), (111) and
(iv) Animal (Tiryanch). (112)
(15) Agurulaghu, which has reference to the weight of matter, of which any
particular body may be made. Literally, the word Agurulaghu means neither
light nor heavy, hence it has reference to that energy which is responsible for
the manufacturing of the material of the different bodies, which, bulk for bulk,
is neither heavy like iron, nor light like cotton-wool. (113)
(16) Upaghata, by whose operation are formed such organs as are inimical to
the very organism to which they belong e.g., big, bulky belly, long horns, and
the like. (114)
(17) Paraghata, the energy that makes organs, which might be used for the
destruction of others, such as sharp horns, poisonous fags and the like. (115)
(18) Atapa, which makes a heat-producing and luminous body, such as that of
the prithavikaya Jivas in the solar orb. (116)
(19) Udyta, the energy which produces a phosphorescent, that is, luminous, but
not heat-producing, organism, e.g., the body of a fire- fly. (117)
(20) Vihayogati, the energy which enables one to fly, or move through air. It is
either Shubha (grace- full) (118) orashubha (the opposite of graceful). (119)
(21) Breathing (uchchhvasa). (120)
(22) Trasa, which procures birth in the classes of Jivas above the one- sensed
type. (121)
(23) Sthavira, which leads to birth in the class of one-sensed Jiva. (122)
(24) Badara, which produces a body capable of offering resistance to, and of
being resisted by, other bodies. (123)
(25) Sukshma, which produces a body incapable of offering resistance to, or of
being resisted by, others. (124)
(26) Periapt, the power to utilize the particles of matter for the full
development of certain physical and mental faculties. (125)
This is of six kinds, namely--
(a) The power to absorb nourishment,
(b) The power to build the body from the nourishment
absorbed,
(c) The power to develop physical organs and faculties,
including that of sense perception,
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

(d) The power to maintain breathing and circulation of blood,
(e) The power of speech, and
(f) The power of discrimination, or thinking with the help of
the physical organ of thought.
(27) Aparyapti, the energy, which does not permit the development of the any
of the six parayaptis or powers described under the next preceding head. (126)
(28) Pratyeka, which appropriates a body to one soul only. (127)
(29) Sadharan, which enables a body to be appropriated by more than one
souls. (128)
(30) Sthira, the energy which retains the various dhatus and upadhatus in their
respective positions in the body. The dhatus are juices, blood, flesh, fat, bone,
marrow and semen; and the upadhatus wind, bile, phlegm, nerves, sinews, skin
and the digestive fire. (129)
(31) Asthira, the energy which tends to disturb the equilibrium of dhatus and
upadhatus. (130)
(32) Shubha-Nama-karma is a prakriti, which imparts attractiveness to the
limbs of the body. (131)
(33) Ashubha-Nama-karma is the energy, which makes the bodily limbs
unattractive and offensive to look at. (132)
(34) Subhaga-Nama-karma is an energy which makes one the object of love by
others. (133)
(35) Durbhaga-Nama-karma acts in the opposite way to the Subhaga prakriti.
(134)
(36) Susvara renders speech agreeable and melodious. (135)
(37) Dusvara makes the voice croaky and unpleasant to hear. (136)
(38) Adeya imparts radiance and glow to the body. (137)
(39) Anadeya makes a body devoid of radiance or glow. (138)
(40) Yashakirti makes one popular in the world. (139)
(41) Ayashakirti operates in the opposite way, and makes one unpopular. (140)
(42) Tirthankara-Nama-karma raises one to the supreme status of a
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

Tirthankara (God). (141)
VII. Gotra karmas are the two kinds, that which secures one's birth in a noble,
influential or prosperous family (Uchcha gotra) (142) and that, which drags the
soul into opposite kinds of surroundings (Niche gotra). (143)
VIII. Antaraya karmas comprise the following five kinds of karmic energy:
(i) That which interferes with the making of gifts, though we may be
willing to do so, (144)
(ii) That which steps in to deprive us of gain, though we might do all in
our power to deserve it, (145)
(iii) That which prevents one's enjoying things, which can be enjoyed
only once, such as food, (146)
(iv) That which interferes in the enjoyment of things which may be
enjoyed in more than once, such as pictures, and (147)
(v) Lack of effectiveness to accomplish anything, though we may do
our best to succeed. (148)
It will be seen from the above classification of karma- prakriti that the
total number of energies falling under the eight groups is 148, which exhaust
the whole range of karmas thought it is possible to divide and sub-divide them
still further under many heads. Of these, the number of energies which fall
under the description of the Nama karma alone is ninety-three, the remaining
fifty-five being divided among the other groups. The number of prakriti of the
Ghatia karmas out of these fifty-five is forty-seven, which comprise five of
Jnana varaniya, nine of darsana varaniya, twenty-eight of Mohaniya and five
of Antaraya, the remaining eight, along with the ninety-three of the Nama
karma, are all Aghatia, since they do not prevent to the natural properties of the
soul from becoming manifested. It is these 47 energies of the Ghatia karmas,
which stand in the way of salvation, and debar us from the enjoyment of our
natural attributes --omniscience, bliss, and the like.
SAMVARA
It is clear from what has been said in the earlier chapters that karmic
matter flows into the soul with every action, whether mental or physical and
that the fusion of spirit and matters takes place only when the soul is rendered
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

receptive, or negative, in consequence of its desires. It would follow from this
that complete freedom can be attained only by checking the continuous activity
of mind and body which is the cause of fresh Asrava, and by the elimination of
the accumulated deposit of karmic force from the soul. Hence, the first thing to
do is to bring under control the organs of action which act as doorways to the
ingress of the enemy. This amounts to saying that perfect control must be put
on mind, body and speech, which are the three inlets for the particles of karmic
matter to enter into the soul. The process of checking the inflow of fresh
matter through these doorways is called Samvara, which is of two kinds,
namely (i) Bhava Samvara and (ii) dravya Samvara. The former of these two
kinds of Samvara signifies the control of passions, emotions, likes and dislikes,
and the latter, i.e. dravya Samvara, the cessation of the influx of the particles of
matter.
Now, since passions and emotions only arise by virtue of unsatisfied
desires, he who would bring them under control must begin by renouncing his
desires in the first instance. Similarly, since dravya Asrava* takes place through
the doorways of mind, body and speech, the controlling of the unchecked
activity of these inlets of karmas is equally necessary for the aspirant for release
from the bondage of 'sin'. To this end the following rules have been laid down
by the omniscient Tirthankaras for the guidance of their non-involved brethren:
(*Karmas are generally dealt with under two heads: (i) Bhava karmas and (ii)
dravya karmas. Of these, Bhava karmas signify different kinds of mental states
of the soul, and dravya karmas the material forces forged in consequence of
those mental states. This distinction if also observed in respect of Asrava,
bandha, Samvara, nirjara and Moksha. We thus have Bhava Asrava signifying
the condition of receptivity or negativity, which is favorable for the influx of
matter into the soul, and dravya Asrava, the actual inflow material itself.
Similarly, Bhava bandha, Bhava Samvara, Bhava nirjara and Bhava Moksha
have reference to mental attitude, and dravya bandha, dravya Samvara dravya
nirjara and dravya Moksha to the physical side of the question.)
1. The control of mind, speech and body (Gupti).
2. The cultivation of the habit of carefulness (Samiti) in respect of the
following five particulars:
(a) Walking, so as not to injure any living being;
(b) Speech so as not to cause pain to any one by offensive, disagreeable
language, or by a careless use of words having a tendency to incite others to
violent deeds; (c) Eating so as not to cause injury to any living being;
(d) Handling things --begging bowl, books and the like, with which
there is a great danger of injury to small insects; and,
(e) Evacuation and disposal of faces, urine and the like.
3. The observance of the rules of the das-lakshana (consisting of ten rules or
commandments) Dharma (path), viz.
(a) Forgiveness,
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

(b) Humility,
(c) Honesty or straight forwardness,
(d) Truthfulness,
(e) Purity of mind, i.e. the avoidance of passions,
(f) Mercy and control of senses.,
(g) Tapa (asceticism, i.e. the performance of acts of self-denial, in order
to bring the pure attributes of the soul into manifestation),
(h) Renunciation (the giving of gifts, non-attachment, and the like),
(i) Avoidance of greed, and
(j) Chastity
4. Constant meditation on the following twelve forms of reflection
(Bhavanas):
(i) Anita Bhavanas 'All things are transitory in the world; no condition
of existence therein is everlasting; it is useless to be attached to the forms of
perishable things; they can only cause pain and suffering; Dharma (religion)
alone is one's true friend; friends, relations, health, wealth, beauty, strength and
the like shall all desert one some day; Atma alone is nitya (eternal); he alone has
to taste the fruit --Sukha (happiness) and Dukha (misery)--of his actions;
therefore one's Atma alone is the fit object of attachment.'
(ii) Asarana Bhavana-- 'None can help the Jiva in his troubles, he alone
has to bear his pain and suffering; friends, relations, wife and children are
powerless to combat suffering and disease; Dharma is the only protector of the
helpless; Dharma enables the Jiva, by his own power, to surmount all obstacle
therefore Dharma should be practiced under all circumstances. One should also
be devoted to the five kinds of Teachers (Arihanta, Siddha, Acharya,
Upadhyaya and Sadhu), who preach the true Dharma.
(iii) Samsara Bhavanas --'Endless is the cycle of transmigration; painful
is every form of life; there is no happiness in any of the four conditions of
existence; Devas, human beings, animals and residents of hells are all involved
in pain and misery of some kind or other; Moksha alone is blissful and free from
pain; the wise should, therefore, only aspire for Moksha; all other conditions are
temporary and painful.'
(iv) Equate Bhavanas --'Alone does the Jiva come into the world; alone
does he leave it to be re-born elsewhere; alone does he bear the consequences
of his karmas; therefore, one should bestir oneself for the destruction of
karmas.'
(v) Anyatva Bhavana --'Soul is distinct from the body; it is also distinct
from one's wife and child; at the moment of death it leaves them all --its body,
relations and the like-- behind when one's body even is not one's own, what
good is to be had out of regarding any one else as one's own?'
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

(vi) Asuchi Bhavana-- 'The body is full of foul matter; it is constantly
passing out filth; if its skin be removed it would cease to be attractive, it cannot
be purified by unguents and scents; it is only a store-house of impurities; faces,
saliva etc., does it contain; fool, indeed, is he who allows such a body to
become his master; it is to be treated as a slave.'
(vii) Asrava Bhavana-- 'Asrava is the cause of the influx of karmas; all
kinds of evil arise from it; the wise should know and understand the nature of
Asrava, and control his conduct.'
(viii) Samvara Bhavana (meditation on the nature of Samvara).
(ix) Nirjara Bhavana (meditation on the nature of nirjara Tattva).
(x) Loka* (universe) Bhavana (one should meditate on the form,
material and nature of the three worlds.
(*Meditation on the form of the universe, its principle divisions, and the
conditions of life which prevail there in, is called the Loka Bhavana. The
infinity of Akash (space) is divided into two parts, the Lokakasa (universe) and
the Aloka Akash (the region beyond the universe). Nothing but pure space is to
be found in the Alokakasa, while the Lokakasa contains the remaining five
substances, namely, Jiva, matter, Time, Dharma and Adharma, without which
there can be no universe. The form of the universe (Lokakasa) is that of a
spindle resting on half of another, and resembles the figure of a man standing
with his arms akimbo. The middle part of this man-shaped universe is called the
madhya Loka (the middle region), the upper the urdhva Loka (celestial region)
and the lower the adho Loka (the nether region). The celestial region consists
of sixteen heavens on eight stories, nine upper heavens (graivey Akash), nine
anudishas and five Anuttara (still higher regions of Devas), with the place of
residence of the Siddha Atma at the extreme top. The madhya Loka comprises
a very large number of continents and seas, with the Jambu Dvipa, of which our
little earth forms a part, in the center. Below the madhya Loka are the
dwellings of certain kinds of beings --bhavnavasin Devas and others of their
type. Below these are the seven hells, one on the top of another, while the
lowest part of the universe is called nigoda.
As regards the conditions of life, which prevail in the different parts of
the universe, the Devas enjoy great elicits which increases the higher ascend. In
the lowest heavens, the Devas and Devangnas (wives of Devas) enjoy long life
and co-habit like human beings; they have no bones in their bodies, which are
resplendent and shining, and capable of assuming any desired form by the mere
force of will. As we rise higher in the celestial region, the method of the
gratification of sex-passion becomes less and less gross in form --in some
heavens satisfaction resulting from mere contact, in others from perception,
conversation, and so forth --till it finally disappear in the Graiveyakas, where
there are no Devangnas.
Longevity also varies in the different heavens, becoming longer and
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

longer as we go up, till the longest Ayuh in the last Anuttara comprises no less
than thirty-three saguaros (oceans) of years. The residents of the highest
Anuttara have only one more earth-life to undergo before final emancipation.
In the madhya Loka, human beings are found in different places, in the
first two and a half continents which cover the entire region illumined by the
Sun. The conditions of life differ in these regions also, owing to the influence
of the motion of suns, stars, moons and other heavenly bodies. In some places
men enjoy great felicity, almost equaling that of Devas, while in others, such as
our little earth, the conditions of life vary with the periods of time.
As regards the conditions of existence in hells, life is more and more
painful as we descend to lower and lower regions. Duration of life also
increases proportionately in the lower hells, varying from 10,000 years in the
first hell to thirty-three saguaros in the lowest, i.e., the seventh. The nigoda is
the place into which fall all those who commit the worst kinds of sins. These
are they who may be said to go to the 'outer darkness,' in the language of the
Bible. Their case is hopeless, and, although they might come out of it again, no
one can say how long they might have to remain there. Excruciating pain,
extreme misery and unbearable torment at the hands of their neighbors and
superiors are the characteristics of existence in hells. The residents of these
unhappy regions are all neuter, and spend their time in lamentation and
anguish.)
(xi) Bodhidurlabha Bhavana --'Difficult is it to acquire the human form; having
acquired it, it is difficult to know the truth, having known the truth, it is difficult
to have faith in it; having acquired faith in the truth, difficult it is to practice it;
therefore no opportunity should be lost in the acquisition of the Three Jewels
(Right Faith, Right Knowledge and Right Conduct).
(xii) Dharma Bhavana --'Dharma (religion) without mercy is but a form of
Mithyatva (falsehood); Dharma is the reflection of divine effulgence of the
Atma; without Dharma Moksha (freedom) cannot be attained; true Dharma is
the source of life and joy to all living beings; Dharma, therefore, must be
observed in all things.'
5. The endurance, with equanimity and cheerfulness, of the twenty-two forms
of hardship (parisaha) consequent on (i) hunger, (ii) thirst, (iii) cold, (iv) heat,
(v) insect-bite, (vi) nakedness, (vii) disagreeable surroundings (viii) love for the
opposite sex, (ix) pain arising from the duty to be moving about, (x) discomfort
caused by the observance of rules as regards sitting or lodging in certain kinds
of places, (xi) suffering due to the observance of regulations concerning
sleeping, (xii) abuse, (xiii) ill-treatment, (xiv) begging, (xv) disappointment
from getting no alms, (xvi) disease, (xvii) thorn pricks, (xviii) bodily dirt and
impurities, (xix) disrespect shown by men, (xx) pride of learning, (xxi)
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

persistence of ignorance, and (xxii) the existence of causes which tend to
interfere with faith.
6. Right conduct which includes:
(a) Five kinds of spiritual purity
(i) Equanimity,
(ii) Penalties for faults arising from inadvertence, or negligence on
account of which one loses equanimity,
(iii) Refraining from Hinsa,
(iv) Control of passions, and
(v) Contemplation of one's own Atma; and,
(b) Observance of vows Ahimsa, truthfulness, non-stealing, celibacy and
non-attachment to the objects of senses.
In connection with Samvara, it is important to note that a full
acquaintance with the subject of Asrava is necessary to avoid confusion of
thought, in reference to the determination of the rules of proper conduct. We
have already dealt with this subject in a general way in the fourth chapter, but as
it is of Parmaount importance to be acquainted with the special causes of
specific karmas, we shall enter into a more detailed description of them here.
To begin with the group of karmas known as the Jnana varaniya, we notice
that the energies which fall under this head are all those which are characterized
by the property of offering obstruction to knowledge. Their causes, therefore,
must be such as have a tendency to obliterate existing knowledge or to obstruct
the acquisition of truth. Analysis of these causes would show them to fall under
two different heads, namely, the endeavor to hold back, conceal or evade truth,
and non-exertion in the right direction for its acquisition. The former comprise
all those tendencies of mind which aim at obscuring the real point in issue by
evasion, perversion, subterfuge, mysticism, false interpretation, hypocrisy
deceitfulness, misplaced subtlety, and the like; and the latter, such traits as
physical laziness which prevent study and the acquisition of truth. According to
the Jaina Siddhanta the following amongst others, are the main causes of the
Jnana varaniya type of karmas:
(1) Maintaining silence born of resentment of hatred, in the presence of
one who is imparting true knowledge;
(2) Knowing the truth and yet excusing oneself, when questioned on the
plea of ignorance;
(3) Withholding truth under the apprehension that the questioner would
become equally wise;
(4) Interfering with the advancement of truth and learning, or preventing
the acquisition of knowledge;
(5) Condemning the truth when propounded by another;
(6) Finding fault with truth in self;
(7) Laziness;
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

(8) Indifference to truth;
(9) Disrespectful attitude towards the Scripture of truth;
(10) Pride of learning;
(11) Teaching or preaching falsehood;
(12) Running down the truly wise; and
(13) A general encouragement of falsehood.
There are many other such causes, which the reader will have no
difficulty in ascertaining for himself. As regards the three higher forms of
knowledge, the Avadhi, the Manahparyava and the Kevala jnana, they are
obstructed by lack of inner concentration of mind due to sensual lust, passions,
worry, and the like, since they arise in the consciousness of advanced Munis
(ascetic saints), who become established in the contemplation of the Atma.
The specific causes of the darsana varaniya group of karmic forces are
those which interfere with the different kinds of perceptive faculties. Kevala
darsana is the natural function of Jiva dravya, and arises from the destruction
of the Ghatia karmas. The causes, which obstruct its manifestation, therefore,
are all those that give rise to the Ghatia karmas. The same is the case, to some
extent, with Avadhi darsana (clairvoyant vision) which also arises from a partial
destruction of evil karmas. Hence, anger, pride deceit and greed, which deprive
the soul of mental serenity and lead to worry and disquietude of mind, are
directly the causes of the obstruction of these two kinds of darsana
(perception).
Turning to Chaksu darsana (vision), its development and functioning
are generally prevented by the malformation of the eyes or visual centers of the
brain. In either case, it is the clogging of some part of the organic structure
which is responsible for the total or partial destruction of vision, while the
clogging itself is due to the lodgment of particles of matter in a place where
they should not be. Improper exercise of the function of vision; such as
pretending not to see, affecting disgust at the sight of a being or thing,
especially when he or it happens to be an object of worship and veneration, and
other like deeds which throw the organs of vision into an unnatural strained or
crooked attitude, and there by allow the incoming particles of matter to find a
lodgment in a place not intended for them, are the main causes of a total or
partial absence of vision. Besides these, the influence of 'suggestion' as a
general psychological cause of malformation is not to be ignored, and many
cases are reported in the records of psychical research in which the sight of
painful wounds and the like has occasioned similar conditions in the beholders
thereof. Hence, acts such as pulling out the eye-balls of another from their
sockets, and then feeling delight at the unhappy condition of the victim of one's
fiendish tyranny, are also calculated to deprive one of vision. Delighting in
interfering with another's beholding a Jaina saint, preventing him from having
access to an object of worship, such as Scripture, from motives of hatred and
the like, are also causes which lead to the loss of vision in a subsequent re-birth,
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

and, may be, in this very life.
Similar considerations also govern Achaksu darsana, which means
perception with the help of the remaining four senses other than sight.
As regards the different kinds of sleep, it is to be observed that sleep is
consistent with the nature of soul, which is pure consciousness or intelligence,
but is forced on it in consequences of its union with matter. Hence when the
soul's union with matter becomes less overpowering in nature, as happens in the
case of true Munis (ascetic saints) sleep, somnolence and all other forms of
stupor which are matters of daily experience to all spiritually undeveloped souls,
lose their hold on the Jiva.
The causes of the different forms of stupor and sleep are various; they
are caused by mental worry, passions, and like, and also by foods which
augment somnolence, laziness and lethargy of body or mind.
We now come to the third group of karmic energies, known as
Vedaniya. Bearing in mind what has been said about the power of suggestion
and the negative attitude of the soul in connection with the other kinds of
karmas, it can be readily seen that the causes which give rise to the experiences
of pleasure and pain must be as follows:
(a) In the case of pleasurable feelings sympathy, gift (of four kinds, viz.,
of medicine, food, 'protection' and knowledge), piety, renunciation, purity of
mind, speech and body, mercy, tranquillity and like, and
(b) In the case of unhappy experiences, the causing of pain to others and
also to one's own self, grief, vain regrets, weeping, and also causing others to
weep, killing or injuring others or oneself, back-biting, abusing, hard-
heartedness, terrorizing and all those other forms of action which are opposed
to the causes enumerated under the preceding head.
The next group of karmas, which demand our attention, is Mohaniya,
which is of two kinds, Darsana-Mohaniya and Charitra Mohaniya. The causes
of the former kind are, (a) showing disrespect to the Kevali (the soul who has
conquered the four kinds of his Ghatia karmas and has attained to
omniscience), (b) finding fault with the Scripture of truth, i.e. the teaching of
Jainism, (c) regarding a true Muni as a charlatan, (d) imputing impiety to the
residents of heavens, and (e) treating religion with contempt.
Charitra-Mohaniya is caused by such conduct as the failure to control
desires and passions, abuse, idle talk, causing pain to another, keeping evil
company, grief, delight in injuring others, heartless-ness, back-biting, despising
virtuous men, and the like. The sex-passion peculiar to women is caused by
becoming deeply attached to another man's wife, and by developing habits of
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

thought and traits of character peculiar to women; the male sex-passion by
milder forms of anger and greed, by sexual purity and by having no desire for
the embellishment of one's body; and the neuter sex-passion by the intensity of
the four kinds of passions (anger, pride, deceit and greed) castration unnatural
gratification of sexual lust, imputation of unchaste to a chaste and virtuous
woman and by madly falling in love with the married spouse of another.
The causes of the specific energies of the four kinds of Ayuh karma are
those which determine the duration of the association of the taijasa and the
Karma Shareers with the body of gross matter. This depends on the quality of
the material of the outer body and on the nature of its association with the other
two, and is ultimately traceable to the good or bad Karmas of the Jiva himself.
Of the four kinds of Ayuh karma, the first namely Deva Ayuh, depends on the
Vaikriyaka sarira of Devas which results from pure thoughts and actions, such
as observance of vows, non-injuring, truthfulness, chastity, non-stealing and
non- attachment. According to the Scripture no one who has already
engendered the Ayuh karma of life in hells (nark Ayuh) can have sufficient
strength of will left to observe the five vows of a Jaina house- holder. The
second, i.e. Manushya Ayuh is the fruit of actions of a middling type, such as
partial control of senses, desires, passions, and the like.
The third, or the animal form of life, is forced on the soul in
consequence of slavery to senses, regardless of the means employed for their
gratification. Sensual lust, deceit the preaching of falsehood for procuring
livelihood, excessive grief, intense aversion to any particular being or thing,
giving free reins to imagination to dwell upon the details of past or expected
future experiences of sexual and other kinds of bodily pleasures, and praying
for future prosperity to indulge in the delights of senses to the full, are some of
the causes that lead to re-birth in the animal kingdom, and determine the
longevity of the different types of animal life.
The fourth kind of Ayuh, i.e., that peculiar to the residents of hells, is
the consequence of the worst forms of falsehood, parigraha (attachment to the
objects of senses, passions, evil thoughts, Hinsa (injury), and the like.
The duration* of life in the four Gatis (conditions of life, Deva
Manushya etc), is given by the Siddha Bhagawan to vary from less than 48
minutes in the human and Tiryanch kingdoms to 33 saguaros (oceans, a very
large number) of years in the highest heaven and lowest hell is 10,000 years in
the first hell, and the same is the shortest duration of Deva Ayuh in the lowest
heaven.
*(To understand the nature of the Ayuh karma, it is necessary to bear in mind
the fact that birth and death are two alternating phases of life of the soul
involved in the cycle of transmigration. Neither pure spirit nor matter is, in any
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

sense, liable to suffer death, since the unit of each is a simple, that is to say,
indivisible and indestructible substance, and, therefore, not liable to
disintegration.
The Karma sarira of the samsara Jiva, which is the product of the union of
spirit and matter, is the factor which determines the liability to birth and death,
for so long as it exists-- and it is only destroyed just prior to the obtainment of
final emancipation-- it remains liable to changes of form resulting from the
processes of inflow of matter into, and of its removal from, the constitution of
the soul. Time, the ubiquitous medium of change, aptly called kala (death),
because of a change of condition being the essence of death, also tends to bring
about a dissolution of form, in consequence of the operation of bodies on one
another. Thus, while the bondage of the soul is prolonged by the fresh influx of
matter, great changes take place periodically, qualitatively and quantitatively, in
the composition and structure of the Karma Shareer. When the soul's
association with its outer body is rendered impossible in consequence of these
changes, or from any other cause, it departs from it, and is then said to die. Its
death, however, is a signal for a fresh outburst of its organizing activities
elsewhere, for it is immediately attracted into a new womb, and at once
proceeds to organize-- mechanically, no doubt-- a new outer body for itself.
The force which determines the length of the period of the association between
the soul and its outermost body is called the Ayuh karma. This association is
liable to come to an end either
(1) Naturally, as the culmination of the incessant processes of change and
readjustment going on internally, or (2) By the separation of the soul from its
gross body, in consequence of the impairment or destruction of some vital
organ or organs. The distinction between these two kinds of causes of death
lies in the fact that, while the association of the soul with its gross body is
rendered impossible in consequence of the changes in the structure of the
Karma Shareer in the one case, in the other it is due to the impairment or
destruction of some vital organ of the outermost body itself. Hence, premature
death is a possibility of experience where the outermost body is liable to be
destroyed accidentally, but not where it enjoys an immunity from accidents, as
is the case with the Vaikriyaka body (of Devas and residents of hells), the
parts of which, as the Scripture shows, immediately join again on being pierced
or cut. Those who maintain that no one can die before his time, necessarily
deny premature death, but they forget that the force which regulates the natural
duration of life necessarily resides in the Karma sarira, while an accidental
termination of life is the result of forces operation from without. The un-
consumed residue of Ayuh karma is, in cases of accidental death, dissipated at
once.
It is also evident from the nature of the Ayuh karma that the idea of a
perpetuation of the physical life is a self-contradictory one. The Ayuh karma is
like a lump of sugar placed in a flowing channel of water, and is bound to be
dissolved sooner or later. Nor is it possible to reinforce a force generated in a
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

past life, for the nucleus of the past is like the effervescence of aerated water
which cannot be augmented by any means.)
There is no premature death in the celestial or nether regions, though the
beings belonging to the human and Tiryanchas Gatis may die before the
exhaustion of their Ayuh karma.
The causes of the principle Nama karma prakriti broadly speaking,
resolve themselves into two general types the Shubha (auspicious) and the
Ashubha (inauspicious). Those of the first kind are pure holy thoughts,
straightforwardness, honest behavior, frankness candor, fair-dealing, love of
truth, and the like; while those of the second are trickery, dishonesty,
perversion of truth, falsehood, cunning keeping false weights and measures,
preparing false accounts, making faces mimicry, prejudice fanaticism, merriment
at the malformation of others, and all other actions of a similar type which imply
a distorted frame of body, or mind, or both.
The causes of the Tirthankara Nama karma prakriti, the holiest and most
auspicious of all the Shubha energies of karma, are: 1 perfect faith, 2 control
of passions, 3 observance of vows, 4 constant meditation on the Tattvas, 5 fear
of re-birth (samsara), 6 unstinted charity, 7 performance of austerities, 8
protection of Munis (ascetics) engaged in Tapa, 9 nursing and otherwise
tending sick saints, 10 devotion to the omniscient Tirthankara and reflection of
His virtues and attributes, 11-12 reverence for the Acharya (Pontill, the
Upadhyaya (Teacher or Preceptor), 13 reverence for the Scripture, 14 due
observance of the six essential rules of conduct [(i) daily meditation, (ii) praise
of the 24 Tirthankaras, (iii) salutation of the Master, (iv) Self- contemplation
with a disclaimer of the sense of attachment of the physical body], 15 teaching
and preaching the doctrines of Jainism, with a view to remove the darkness of
ignorance from the world, and 16 cherishing great love for all true believers.
It is worth while to note that the Nama karma is chiefly concerned with
the formation of the limbs of the physical body which is organized by the soul
with its own inherent energy. At the end of each form of life a mechanical re-
adjusting of the 'liquid' compound consisting of the Jiva and the matter of its
two inner bodies, the Karma and the taijasa, takes place, altering its
constitution and the type of its rhythm, in obedience to the influence of the
forces stored up in the mass. The resulting form is the seed of the next life, the
rhythm of which represents the sum-total of the forces which are to come into
play in the body to be organized in the new surroundings to which it is
immediately mechanically drawn. The number of these types of rhythm-- Plato
would have called them 'Ideas'-- is 84,000,000 as given in the Scripture. It is
the rhythm of the seed like compound of spirit and matter which, consisting, as
it does, of the different kinds of karmic energies, is responsible for the
formation of the various limbs of the body. Each time that the soul, enshrouded
in its two inner coats of matter, enters a new 'womb' suitable for the
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

organization of a body, it absorbs or attracts to itself, particles of matter which,
in consequence of the operation of the different kinds of energies, residing in
the Karma sarira, are used for the organizing of the numerous bodily organs.
The complexity of the organism is thus due to the complexity of the forces
residing in the tiny globule of spirit and matter-- the Karma sarira.
We may now proceed to consider the nature of the causes of the seventh group
of karmas, namely, gotra, which determines the circumstances of life.
Obviously the status of the soul, whether high or low, depends on the status of
the family in which it takes its birth; and the birth in a particular family is the
consequence of its being drawn to a particular 'womb'-- the word is here used in
its widest sense including the upapada,* (*Upapada is the method of birth of
Devas and residents of hells, who are born without conception and attain to
adolescence at once.) the Garbha,+ (+Garbha means conception in consequence
of sexual congress.) and the sammurachhana* (*Sammurachhana is the form
of birth in which the soul directly attracts particles of matter to itself to
organize its body. It is found in those low forms of life in the animal and
vegetable kingdoms which are not born after the manner of Garbha.) forms--
by the mechanical action of its inherent force, the result of its own actions in a
past life.
The type of action which lead to a low status include pride of birth,
lineage, descent, beauty, or leaning, the insulting of others for their low birth,
and the like, also want of respect for the Deva (holy Tirthankara), Guru
(spiritual teacher) and Sastras (Scripture), and delighting in proclaiming the low
status and circumstances of another. The opposite kinds of actions, such as
self-abnegation, humility, worship of the true Deva, Guru and Sastras lead to
birth in a high family and happy, prosperous surroundings.
We now come to the eight and the last group of karmas, the Antaraya.
Its causes may be briefly said to consist in those actions of the soul which tend
to interfere with the full development of the functions and faculties, as well as
with the freedom of action of another. The following are fairly typical of this
kind of actions: preventing another from making a gift, robbing others of their
success in their enterprise, spoiling and marring the enjoyment of another, or
depriving him of the opportunity for the full development of his natural powers
and functions. The marrying of little children or of young girls to aged men, the
misappropriation of charity-funds, neglecting to educate one's children,
preventing ones servants and dependents from following the path of true
Dharma, and many other similar acts of omission and commission are also
causes which engender the Antaraya karma. Virya or the fifth kind of
Antaraya is also caused by foods, which augment laziness and foster lethargy of
mind, or body, both.
The above is a fairly complete list of the specific causes of the different
kinds of karmas, and although it is possible to carry on the process of analysis
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

still further in the domain of causality, it will serve no useful purpose to analyze
these causes still further. It may, however, be pointed out here, that many of
the actions described as the causes of the different kinds of karmas might, at
first sight, appear to have little or no casual connection with the energies they
are described as engendering, but a careful study of the motives from which
they proceed and of the accompanying attitude, or condition, of the soul would
at once reveal them to be true to their description. For instance, the reader may
well ask what is the casual connection between the act of marrying one's
children at an early age and the resultant energy of the Antaraya karma, but if
he would take into consideration the state of the mind of the parent who acts in
this manner, he would soon discover that the latter has no idea of the evil
consequences, which result from the uniting of little ones in the bonds of
matrimony, and is purely guided by what he considers to be conducive to his
own pleasure, Thoughtlessness and selfishness, thus, are the causes which lie at
the back of this evil practice, and these, undoubtedly, are the signs of soul's
negativity, the chief cause of all kinds of weakness.
Besides this the form of pleasure which one can possibly derive from marrying
one's child at an early age, being purely of a sensual type, and consisting, as it
does, in the giving of feasts, the performance of notch and the like, clearly
points to the fact that the mind is completely taken up with the gratification of
senses.
We thus have soul's negativity coupled with the desire for
sense-gratification; and these combined lead to an influx of material particles
which easily find a lodgment in, and tend to clog up, certain parts of the Karma
sarira upon which depend the organizing and functioning of all bodily organs.
Now, since the idea and actual sight of little children playing the role of married
people is pregnant with the suggestion of the abeyance of sexual function, the
inflow of matter takes place in and clogs the very centers which are concerned
in the formation, development and proper functioning of the generative organs.
The result is that the Antaraya karma of the third and fourth kinds is generated
at once, the consequences of which shall have to be borne by the soul in its
present or future life or lives.
This one illustration practically disposes of all other karma engendering
actions whose casual connection with the specific energies they give birth to
may seem to be too far- fetched or remote. It should also be distinctly
understood that habits play no unimportant part in the operation of the force of
karma, since an action repeated a number of times has a tendency to become
automatic.
Thus, the operation of the law of karma is governed by the two following rules,
namely, (i) every action affects that part of the Karma sarira which corresponds
to the physical organ concerned, or involved, in its performance, or in the
mental suggestion relating to its performance, and (ii) every repetition leans
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

towards the automatism of habit.
So far as the first of these two rules is concerned, it is not difficult to
perceive that the influx of matter should affect the Karma sarira in a part
corresponding to the physical organ involved in the doing of any particular act,
because it is the organ principally concerned in the deed, and, deed, and,
therefore, the only natural seat of influx.
As regards the second rule, also, it is clear that habit implies an
unconscious intensification of the impulse to act, and means neither more nor
less than the tightening of bonds, though in the case of virtuous deeds every
repetition has the effect of making the bondage more and more pleasant.
Those who do not control their passions and evil actions, thus, run the
risk of becoming perfect slaves to their sway, and may have to experience
consequences which they little dream of in this life.
NIRJARA
The ceaseless activity of the samsari soul, while responsible for its
ever-renewing bondage, is also the cause of its constantly changing
circumstances. As new particles
of matter flow into the Karma sarira, they ceaselessly modify its constitution,
ejecting and displacing those already there.
In this respect the Karma sarira resembles the surface of a pond fed by
a channel in which the processes of inflow and evaporation of water are
constantly going on. This mechanical process of 'evaporation' of karmas is
called savipaka nirjara, which means the removal of matter from the Karma
sarira in the ordinary course of things. The other kind, called avipaka, is the
process of the removal of matter, and the consequent destruction of karmic
energies, by individual exertion; and it is this second kind of nirjara which is the
direct cause of Moksha.
The avipaka nirjara consists in the performance of Tapa, which literally
means heating. As pure gold can be easily separated from alloy by putting the
impure compound on fire, so can a Jiva free himself from the various kinds of
karmas by Tapa (asceticism). It should be born in mind that dependence on any
outside agency for the removal of one's karmic bonds not only means so much
time wasted, but is also fraught with the most harmful consequences. Our
investigation into the nature of the bonds which hold us tight in their grip has
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

revealed the fact that they arise only from our own desires, beliefs, passions
and the like, and cannot be destroyed, by any possibility, so long as we do not
obtain full control on our own actions. The training of the individual will, then,
is the only way to salvation, and it is no exaggeration to say that no one who
does not seriously take himself in hand has the least shadow of a chance of
acquiring the freedom of Gods.
Tapa is of two kinds, bahya, and antaranga, the one signifying the
controlling of body, and the other of mind. The former of these consists in the
process of self- restraint, and is of the following six kinds:
(i) Anashana, or fasting, the frequent observance of which is
well-calculated to purify the sense organs, on the one hand, and to lessen the
sense of attachment to the objects of bodily enjoyment on the other.
(ii) Avamodarya, or the avoidance of full meals. The habitual practicing
of this form of self-restraint would go a long way towards eradicating laziness
from the system and would impart fresh energy to the mind.
(iii) Vrita parisankhyana, putting restrictions on begging for food, for
instance, taking the vow that nothing would be eaten on a certain day unless it
be given by a raja, or in golden vessels, and so forth.
(iv) Rasa parityaga, or abstaining from one or more of the six kinds of
tasty articles of food, clarified butter, milk, Dahi (a kind of sour milk), sugar,
salt and oil.
(v) Bibikta shayyasana or living in unfrequented places, away from the
haunts of men; staying in unoccupied houses, and the like.
(vi) Kayaklesa, the practicing of bodily austerities such as remaining in
the sun in summer, standing under a tree in rain, living on the bank of a river in
winter, and the like. The object of kayaklesha is to get over the longing for
bodily comfort, and to prepare the system to bear the inclemency's of seasons
without disquietude of mind.
The practicing of these six forms of physical austerities is necessary for
perfection in the antaranga Tapa, which is also of six kinds, viz.,
(1) Prayashchita, the doing of penance for faults committed through Pramad
(laziness).
(2) Vinaya which is of four kinds, viz.,
(a) Darshan Vinaya, the establishing of mind in right belief, or faith, and
showing respect to those who have such belief;
(b)Jnana Vinaya, observing due respect for those who are endowed with true
wisdom, and the acquisition of Jnana;
(c) Charitra Vinaya, the observance of the rules of conduct becoming a layman
and a Sadhu (anascetic), and the reverence of those who follow these rules; and
(d) Upachara- Vinaya, behaving with great respect towards the Scripture of
truth, saints and holy personages.
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

(3) Vaiyavritya, serving and attending upon holy saints, and offering them
food, books, and the like.
(4) Svadhyaya, or the acquisition and spreading of truth with energy. This is of
five kinds, viz., (i) reading Scripture, (ii) questioning those more learned than
oneself, (iii) meditation, (iv) testing the accuracy of one's own conclusions with
those arrived at by great Acharyas, and (v) the preaching of truth to others.
(5) Vyutsarga, discrimination between the Atma and the body.
(6) Dhyana, or contemplation, i.e., the concentration of mind on some object,
and, in the highest sense, on the Atma.
Of these six kinds of antarange Tapa, the last, called Dhyana, is the
chief cause of Moksha, so that the remaining five forms of the internal and all
the six of the physical austerities are only intended as preparatory steps for its
practicing. It is to be observed that the desiring manes (mind) is an extremely
swift rover, passing from object to object with the rapidity of thought, and the
hardest thing to control. Unsteady, full of desires, constantly engrossed in
sense-gratification, volatile and unaccustomed to restraint, it is the principal
cause of disturbance in the purity of Dhyana, and capable of upsetting the
determination of all but the most resolute ascetics of indomitable, iron will. The
holy Acharyas have, therefore, laid down these scientific rules of austerity to
bring this most intrepid enemy of mankind under the control of will, so as to
enjoy undisturbed contemplation.
Apart from this the analysis of the attitude of pure contemplation would
show that its attainment is compatible only with quiescence of body and mind
both. Hence, they both must be taken in hand for ascetic training, and
completely subjugated to the aspirant's will. It must be remembered that
ascetics do not drop from the sky, but come from the class of laymen, so that
when a layman is impressed with the truth of the continuity of life in the future,
he begins to reflect on the circumstances of the soul in which it would find
itself after the somatic death in this world. Meditation on the nature of the soul
and other substances convinces him of the fact that the making or marring of
his future is a thing which is entirely his own concern, and that as a sensible man
he ought to live the life which is conducive to his spiritual good rather than the
life of an animal engrossed in the enjoyment of senses.
Arrived at this conclusion, his mind longs to ascertain what others have
said on the subject and to find out if his own conclusions are true. He then
takes to the study of Scripture, which is the final authority on the subject. His
faith in the Word of Truth increases with his insight into the nature of Tattvas,
and he no longer ridicules the descriptions of things and events in the holy
Sastras. His conduct also becomes characterized by purity of thought, speech
and actions, and finally, when the longing for liberation from the bondage of
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

samsara begins to actuate him intensely from within, he throws off the shackles
of worldly attachment, and takes to Tapa. Thus, no one can become an ascetic
without having first undergone the preparatory training enjoined on the laity,
though owing to the fruition of Shubha (auspicious) karmas of a past life, or
lives, the course of training may be considerably shortened in particular cases.
Thus, the spiritual training of the soul consists of two sets of rules, one
of which apply to the laity and the other to those who have reached the state of
Vairagya (renunciation of the world). The dynamic power which enables a man
to persevere in the observance of these rules lies in the craving of the soul for
liberation, and the craving itself is rooted in the knowledge that the life is
samsara is full of pain and misery, and that the Atma, the true source of
immortality and bliss, is to be freed from the bondage of sin before it can
manifest its natural attributes in perfection. It must be conceded that so long as
the soul depends on any outside agency for the attainment of the highest state
of existence known as the status of the Siddha Atma, it only betrays its inner
emptiness and negativity which are a sure sign of failure in the spiritual realm.
Of the rules prescribed for laymen and saints, those, suitable for the
former are divided into twelve vrata (vows) and eleven pratimas, in addition to
thirty-five minor directions for general conduct enjoined on every house-
holder.
The layman must begin with the avoidance of the five aticharas
(short-comings) of faith, namely, (i) entertainment of doubt after once being
convinced of truth, (ii) desire to belong to another faith, (iii) beginning to
doubt the efficacy of the Law (Dharma) in moments of suffering, (iv) praising
hypocrites, and (v) constant association with those known to follow a wrong
faith. This will enable him to observe the vows, which mark the first stage of
Right Conduct. The twelve vows* are:--
(*The first five of these vows are called anu vrata (minor or less rigid vows),
the next three guna vratas (guna = qualities) because they widen the scope of
the five anu vratas; and the last four shiksha vratas (study vratas) because of
their being helpful in study and meditation.)
(i) To refrain from killing and destroying. Killing means the forcible separation
of the body of gross matter from the two other bodies, the Karma and the
taijasa. It is forbidden, because it is the source of pain to the living being
concerned, and also because it betrays ignorance of the nature of soul in the
destroyer. Hinsa is the immediate cause of hard-heartedness, and leads to
re-births in hells and to suffering and pain generally. This vow extends to all
kinds of killing whether it be done for sport, science (vivisection), dress (skin,
feathers, and the like), food, private revenge, religion (sacrifices), comfort
(destruction of insects, and the like), as a punishment to evil doers (capital
sentence), in self-defense, or for any other purpose. A king who fights in
defending his empire, however, does not violate this vow, for his motive is to
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

protect his subjects. The vow also extends to such acts as tying up animals too
tightly, beating them mercilessly, cutting their limbs, overloading them or
neglecting to feed them properly. Of the five types of living beings, the
one-sensed and the like, a layman is forbidden to kill, or destroy, intentionally,
all except the lowest (like one sensed, such as vegetables, herbs, cereals, etc.,
which are endowed with only the sense of touch).
(ii) Refraining from falsehood. This vow is transgressed by revealing the
secrets of others, false speech, forgery, and the like.
(iii) Stealing or taking what is not freely given is the subject matter of the
third vow. Selling goods not up to sample, employment of false weights and
measures, adulteration, counterfeiting, receiving stolen property, employment
or encouragement of thieves, and harboring dacoits are some of the forms of its
transgression.
(iv) Refraining from indulgence in sex-passion. The Muni is naturally
enjoined to practice complete control, since sex-passion is a great enemy of
spiritual progress; but the layman only vows to restrict his carnal lust to his
married spouse. Artificial gratification, encouraging others in sexual lust,
looking lustfully at any woman other than one's own wife, use of aphrodisiac
remedies when weak, and the like, constitute a transgression of this vow.
(v) Putting a limit on one's possessions. This is calculated to lessen the sense
of power, pride, and the like.
(vi) Setting bounds to one's travels. This does not apply to a Muni, though he
is required to avoid luxury in his traveling.
(vii) Limiting the number of articles of bhoga (those which can be enjoyed only
once, such as food) and upabhoga (which can be enjoyed more than once, such
as furniture, clothes, etc.). The object being the control of (nafs = lower
nature), the layman should cheerfully place greater and greater restrictions on
his senses, remembering always that the aim of life is the attainment of Moksha,
but no the pursuit of sensual lust.
(viii) The eighth vow is designed to guard against unnecessary evil befalling
others through one's carelessness. One should not hope that some evil should
befall another, nor think evil of any one. One should take care not to let oil,
milk and other liquid substances lying about uncovered, for flies and other
insects get drowned in them and thereby suffer unnecessary pain and loss of life.
One should keep as few weapons as possible. The encouraging of another in
evil deeds is also prohibited. We should not also fear the loss of any of the
good things we have-- wealth, friends, health, etc, etc., --nor imagine that
conditions of poverty, disease, ill-luck, and the like are in store for us. Even
undue anxiety to get rid of disease, poverty, and other undesirable conditions is
to be avoided. The vow also condemns such deeds as rejoicing at the death of
another to come into his property, or for one's own safety; giving gratuitous
advice, lending dangerous weapons, such as guns, fishing tackle, and the like;
sheer carelessness of thought, word, and action; drinking, meaningless chitchat,
excessive sleep, talking about things which do not concern one, writing immoral
books, selling evil medicines and poisons, buffoonery, abuse, lustful thoughts,
sensuality, and all other like thoughts and deeds.
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

(ix) The Samayika vow. It consists in spending a certain amount of time at
least once every day in a particular place, reading Scripture, praising the
Master, recounting the merits of the Siddha Atma, repenting of evil deeds, and,
in a general way, concentrating the mind on suitable, proper and holy objects of
meditation.
(x) The tenth vow is a severer form of the sixth, and consists in limiting one's
movements, at least once a year or so, to one room or, at the most, to one's
house. This is transgressed by ordering things from beyond, or by transacting
business outside the limits.
(xi) This vow is a severer form of the ninth. Prolonged meditation coupled with
fasting is its characteristic. The layman should try to spend a whole day, four
times in a month, in holy meditation, and should observe fasting on those days.
(xii) Sharing one's food with some holy monk, or a pious Sravaka
(house-holder), and giving him presents of books and other useful articles at
least once a year. This implies that one should also eat the same food as is
offered to the guest.
In addition to these twelve, there is another vow, which a man on the
point of death is expected to take. Its object is to be inferred from the
following formula in which it is generally worded:
"I vow to abstain from food and drink and fruits and sopari (betel-nut)
as long as I live."
Terrible and cruel as this last vow may appear to the uninitiated, it is the
severest form of austerity, and, therefore, leads to the greatest prosperity in the
next life. There is no idea of suicide involved in the operation of this vow, since
it is only taken when the last remaining hope of life is given up. At that
supreme moment of life, when fate may be said to be trembling in the balance,
the successful carrying out of a terrible resolve like this is an ample guarantee of
future happiness, for the exertion of will to adhere to its resolve, in the trying
moments of a departing life, goes a long way to remove its negativity, and there
by enables the soul to attain to the region of heavens where pain and misery are
the least known.
We now come to the eleven pratimas, which may be described as
follows:
(i) The worship of the true Deva (God, i.e., Tirthankara.) guru (preceptor)
and shastra (Scripture), and the avoidance of gambling, meat- cutting, drinking
(wine), adultery, hunting, thieving and debauchery.
(ii) The keeping of the vows, and the Samadhi marina (the last vow taken
on death bed).
(iii) The observance of the Samayika vow at least three times a day.
(iv) The observance of the eleventh vow at least four times a month.
(v) Refraining from eating uncooked vegetables, plucking fruit from a tree,
and the like.
(vi) Abstaining from taking food, etc., as well as from offering it to others
after sunset (to avoid accidental destruction of animal life).
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

(vii) Sexual purity; even keeping away from the society of one's own wife, as
much as possible, also not decorating ones person.
(viii) Abstaining from all kinds of occupations and trades.
(ix) Preparation for Sannyasa, which means withdrawing oneself still further
from the world, dividing one's property among one's sons or heirs, or making
over its management to some other member of the family, and otherwise
generally training oneself to bear the hardships incidental to a life of asceticism.
(x) Practicing a still severer form of the last pratima --eating only what is
permissible, and that only if offered at mealtimes and without special
preparation; refraining even from giving advice on matters relating to family
honor and business, and the like.
(xi) The complete renunciation of the house- holder's life, retiring into a
forest and adopting the rules laid down for the guidance of Munis.
The thirty-five rules of good conduct enjoined on a
Jaina house- holder, are fully described in Mr. Warren's 'Jainism', and may be
summed up as follows.
'He should earn his livelihood by honesty, and follow some kind of
business, which should not be of an ignoble or degrading nature. He should not
undertake to do more than he can perform. The layman should marry to avoid
promiscuous indulgence. He should not commit any offence, and avoid deeds,
which have evil consequences. He should respect wisdom and admire the wise.
He should control his desires and passions. He should not live in dangerous or
infected places, nor in a country where there is no adequate protection of life or
property. He should walk in the footsteps of the wise and the spiritually
advanced, and should not keep the company of bad persons. He should not
build his house in a place altogether open or too much concealed. He should
dress himself simply, and his expenses should be in proportion to his income.
He should follow the customs of the locality where he resides unless they
involve a violation of the rules of Dharma (religion). He should not eat such
things as meat, nor take to intoxicants. He should not slander any body,
especially the king. He should respect his parents, and avoid giving offence to
others by his actions, maintaining and preserving those, dependent on him. He
should live peacefully, respecting and serving the Master, the Preceptor, the
guest and the deserving poor, and observing moderation in all things. He
should sympathize with all, but avoid too much intimacy with any. With regard
to the four objects of life-- Dharma (virtue), Artha (wealth), Kama (pleasure)
and Moksha (salvation)--he should never allow the higher to be sacrificed for
the sake of a lower one. He should daily read the Scripture and observe the
rules of life, excelling in right conduct and aspiring to rise higher and higher
every day. He should avoid obstinacy and develop a partiality for virtue. His
attitude towards religion, philosophy, opinions and beliefs should be that of a
critical student, and he should try to solve all the doubts that arise in his own
mind'.
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

If the house- holder would carefully observe these thirty-five rules of
conduct, he would come into the possession of the following twenty-one marks,
which every true gentleman should possess. He would be serious in demeanor,
clean as regards both his clothes and person, good-tempered, popular, merciful,
afraid of sinning, straight foreword, wise, modest, kind, moderate, gentle,
careful in speech, sociable, cautious, studious, reverent both to old age and
ancient customs, humble, grateful, benevolent, and attentive to business.
By the time that the house- holder becomes steady in the observance of
the above rules of conduct and pratimas he is qualified to become a Muni. The
admission into the order of monks is accompanied by the impressive ceremony
of Kaisha Alochana, which means the pulling out hair. Perhaps this was
intended as a test of the true spirit of Vairagya, since the intensity of the feeling
of disgust with a purely animal existence and the proper observance of the rules
of conduct enjoined on a layman suffice, by themselves, to bring into
manifestation, to a fairly appreciable extent, certain of the natural qualities of
the soul which enable it to endure pain with a cheerful heart. The intoxicating
rhythm of true joy, which is partially felt by a perfect house- holder, is one of
such qualities, and suffices to make one immune to almost all kinds of bodily
pain.
The Kaisha -Alochana over, the house- holder becomes a wanderer,
possessing nothing, and dependent for his very subsistence on the charity of
others. He may posses nothing of value-- neither clothes, nor metal, nor
anything else. His conduct must be characterized by the highest degree of self-
control, and he should perfect himself in righteousness, mercy, equanimity,
renunciation, and all other auspicious qualities of a like nature. His object being
the attainment of absolute freedom from the trammels of samsara, he neither
pays any attention to the taunts or jibes of men, nor to the objects of senses, nor
even to the embellishment of his own person. He aims at the perfection of the
holiest form of Dhyana, the immediate cause of emancipation, and leaves all
other things, such as the embellishment of his physical 'prison' and the like, to
those who have no desire, or capacity, to realize the great Ideal of Immortality
and Bliss. What the others say or think of him does not worry him; he is
indifferent to the vagaries of fortune and the inclemency's of seasons, and
steadily pursues the course he has deliberately adopted for escaping from this
Vale of Tears. While as a house- holder he had vowed only to spend a certain
portion of his time daily in the reading of Scripture and meditation, he now
devotes every moment of his life to these holy objects, and brings all his
energies to bear on the attainment of pure, undisturbed Dhyana. The five great
vows, which he now takes are similar to those of the layman, but of unbending
rigidity.
(i) His first vow relates to the observance of Ahimsa (non-injury) in the
widest sense. The ascetic must try to avoid even injuring the one-sensed form
of life to the best of his ability. He must walk along the trodden path, so as to
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

be able to detect the presence of any insects; use only the gentlest form of
expression in speech; be careful as to the food that is given to him by others;
avoid injuring the insects that might have got into his books, etc., and be
circumspect in depositing refuse, excretions and the like, so as not to injure any
insect's life.
(ii) The second vow enjoins avoidance of untruth, which means not only the
speaking of truth, but also the abstaining from unpleasant or rude speech.
There are five special points to be observed in connection with speech. One
should never speak without deliberation, nor in wrath. Speech when the speaker
is influenced by greed is to be condemned, and the same is the case when one is
moved by fear. To tell a falsehood for fun, or from the desire to return a smart
repartee, is also to be avoided.
(iii) Non-stealing. A monk is required to be exceedingly careful in respect of
this vrata. He should not even enter any one's house without the permission of
the owner, though there be reason to believe that his presence would be
welcomed; nor even use any article belonging to another monk without first
obtaining his permission for the purpose.
(iv) The vow of absolute celibacy. One should not look at the feminine
form, nor occupy any seat previously occupied by a woman or by a female
animal or an eunuch, nor recall to mind the incidents of any past experience of
pleasure in connection with the female sex, nor decorate one's person, nor eat
highly seasoned food.
(v) The vow of renunciation. All liking for pleasant touch, taste, smell,
form (beauty), or word (literature), and for all the objects of the five senses,
also hatred or loathing for unpleasant objects, must be completely surrendered
to the pursuit of the sublime Ideal of the soul.
These are the five great vows of asceticism; and, as stated before, they
differ in the degree of rigidity from the five similar ones of the layman.
The aim being the attainment of liberation from the liability to repeated
births and deaths, the ascetic must ardently and earnestly strive for the
emancipation of his soul in every possible way, shunning virtue as much as
vice-- since they are both instrumental in the prolongation of bondage --and
trying all the time to establish himself in the purity of contemplation of his own
effulgent Atma. It is not to be supposed that the shunning of all kinds of
activities of mind, speech and body is tantamount to idleness; pure and simple,
or leads to stultification of character, as some unthinking writers have urged.
The process of self-contemplation has nothing in common with these two
characteristics of ordinary humanity, and implies the realization of sleepless
bliss, infinite perfection, true immortality and perfect freedom from all kinds of
ties and bonds. There is no use denying the fact that what we call character
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

means neither more nor less than a resolute frame of mind, though all sorts of
evil passions and emotions are also, at times, allowed to be smuggled in under
that name. Self-contemplation does not, in any sense, imply the eradication of
will, rather, on the contrary, it leads to its development in the highest possible
degree, so that if the word character be employed in its true sense, it is only in
respect of the Siddha Atma that it can express its full purport. Nor has the
non-performance of virtuous deeds the effect of exposing the Siddha Atma to
blame for not doing good; for the kind of good which flows from the Perfect
Ones cannot be equaled by men even in imagination. Men generally do good by
gifts of money, medicine, clothes and the like, which, even when we lose sight
of the fact that these things are not always acquired or amassed with a strict
regard to the rules of virtue or good conduct, can only go to afford temporary
relief to the suffering, or, at best, enable them to stand upon their legs to enter
into the struggle for life, --to thrive at the expense of their fellow beings. The
good that constantly flows from the being of the Perfect Ones is not to be
compared to this kind of human philanthropy; it is the greatest good which one
living being can do to another, and consists in the imparting of the knowledge
which would enable each and every soul who cares to benefit thereby, to attain
freedom from all kinds of bonds, and the perfection and joy of Gods. And not
only is the knowledge imparted by the Holy Ones the true source of freedom
and joy, the example set by Them is even more useful to those who aspire to
escape from pain and misery consequent on the four conditions of life, Deva,
Manushya, Tiryanch, and nark. Their holy feet have illuminated the Path to the
highest height of glory, and we have their noble example before us to inspire
and encourage us in the pursuit of the ideal. Let no one in his senses call this
idleness or stultification of character.
It is true that the Siddha Atma do not concern themselves with the
affairs of men-- neither does the Over- Lord of theology, for the matter of that,
else we should not have terrible slaughter of men in wars to say nothing of
other calamities which periodically befall mankind --but it is no less true that no
righteous request of any true follower of Theirs ever remains unsatisfied. The
explanation of this seemingly inconsistent statement is to be found in the fact
that the will of a true believer (he who actually believes that the Holy Ones are
possessed of all kinds of perfection, and are now residing at the top of the
universe, enjoying the highest form of bliss) is potent enough to attract to itself
all kinds of conditions of prosperity, and is also capable of drawing the attention
of the higher order of beings (residents of heavens and other kinds of powerful
beings) who can grant every wish in the twinkling of an eye.
To revert to the rules of conduct laid down for an ascetic, it is to be
observed that he does not adopt the life of hardship under any external
compulsion, but from a conviction of its being the only path to perfection and
joy. He knows that every weakness overcome is a clear gain, and remains
cheerful under the severest trials and mishaps. As he advances steadily along
the path, he soon begins to feel the natural delight of his soul, compared with
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

which the ease and pleasure of millionaires and great potentates of the world
loses all its fascination in his sight. Onward and onward does he press, making
fresh conquests everyday till the all-illumining effulgence of Kevala Jnana
bursts on his consciousness from within, on the breaking up of the clouds of
ignorance and sin amassed together by the four kinds of his Ghatia karmas.
The shock of the destruction of the last knot of karmic bonds is felt by the
Rulers of the heaven- worlds, and they immediately set out to offer worship and
adoration to the conquering Jiva Worshipped and adored by Devas and men,
the Conqueror lingers in the world of men till His Aghatia karmas are worked
off, when He rises to the top of the universe to reside there, for ever, in the
enjoyment of all those divine qualities and attributes which people associate
with their Gods.
It would not be amiss to say a few words here about the nature of the
'shock', which is occasioned by the manifestation of omniscience. It arises from
the breaking asunder of the karmic chains, and the bursting forth of the pure
effulgence of Will determined to manifest itself in all its natural splendor. The
force of will exerted for the destruction of the karmic knot sets up powerful
vibrations all round which, impinging on the finer material of bells and other
things in the heaven-world, set them resounding without any visible cause.
These are noticed by Devas, who ascertaining their cause with the help of the
Avadhi Jnana with which they are endowed from birth, at once proceed to do
reverence to the Master. The destruction of the ghati karmas, it should be
pointed out, is accompanied by many kinds of changes in the system of the
Muni who make a conquest of his lower nature; sense-perception is lost once
for all and for ever, nerve currents are straightened out and lose their Jnana
and darsana obstructing crookedness, and the Karma and taijasa Shareers are
burnt up to ashes, as it were, though they still retain their form owing to the
influence of the remaining four kinds of karmas. The reason for this is that our
nervous system consist of nervous 'threads' which under the influence of the
customary forms of activity have become arranged in certain forms, so that
when we check the activity of the senses and prevent the mind from wandering
in its usual haunts, holding it to a particular point, a kind of strain is produced
which tends to unloosen the very structure of nerves and the knots formed by
them. If we now persevere in the attitude of concentration for a 'sufficiently
long period of time, these nervous 'threads' would become completely detached
from their old groupings, and fall apart. The ascetic, who knows that the
natural 'light' of his soul is obscured by the 'bushel' of matter, and knows how to
remove the cover, concentrates his mind on those centers of his nervous system,
which are the least obscured and affected by matter. As he perseveres in
concentration on these centers, the nervous 'threads' which enter into the 'warp
and woof' of the 'bushel' are loosened and detached from one another, and
dispersed in all directions, leaving the effulgence of pure 'Light' free to manifest
itself. For this very reason, the liability to sleep, which arises from the
preponderance of matter in certain centers of the brain, is also destroyed prior
to the attainment of Kevala Jnana.
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

Dhyana, or concentration of mind, thus, is the direct means of the
attainment of Moksha. It not only enables one to purge one's consciousness of
all kinds of evil passions and inclinations by preventing the uncontrolled
wandering of mind, but also destroys the veil of matter which bars the
manifestation of one's divine powers and attributes-- omniscience, bliss and the
like. It is, therefore, not surprising that the Scripture should describe it as the
sole means of escape from the bondage of samsara, and should lay down the
most minute instructions for its practicing.
MOKSHA
In dealing with the subject of Dhyana, it is necessary to bear in mind the
fact that it is the one most difficult thing to practice, and that all kinds of mental
and bodily distractions have to be overcome before anything approaching
steadiness can be acquired by the beginner. It is, therefore, necessary to know
the nature of the causes, which interfere with the fixing of concentration, and
lead to unsteadiness of mind. These causes naturally fall under three different
head, viz.,
(a) Those that concern belief, or faith,
(b) Those which spring from the activity of an uncontrolled mind, and
(c) Those that arise from bodily unsteadiness.
In respect of the first kind of these causes of obstruction to Dhyana, it is
sufficient to point out that no one is likely to apply himself to the practicing of
holy concentration, who is not convinced of the truth. It is, therefore, the first
duty of the aspirant after emancipation to acquire the knowledge of truth, which
can be done by study and meditation.
For this purpose one should cultivate the habit of thinking for oneself on
lines of cause and effect, that is scientifically. Naturally, those whose early
training has given them a scientific turn of mind would find it easier to arrive at
the exact truth. The importance of imparting the proper kind of education to
little children, cannot be overrated for this reason; for while no one whose mind
is stuffed with superstition and myth can possibly grasp the truth without
unlearning the 'wisdom' that was hammered into his mind in his infancy-- and
many become too prejudiced against truth to undergo the unwinding process--
he who has received the right kind of training has all the advantages, which
open-mindedness, freedom from bias and high intellectualism combine to put at
the service of every true student of nature. No one certainly is at all likely to
know the truth, who allows prejudice or bigotry to obscure his intellect.
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

Another thing to bear in mind is that knowledge and belief are two different
things, and have to be distinguished from one another. Many people profess to
believe in a thing, but their actions only show them to be hypocrites, for the test
of belief is that it should begin to actuate one from within as far as the
circumstances would permit. It is not meant that purity of conduct can be
acquired all at once, but that regret is felt at each wrong step taken, and there is
a longing to repair the damage done. Self-chastisement and the actual undoing
of the injury inflicted upon another are the characteristics of a firm belief, while
perfect faith leads to the avoidance of sinful actions altogether.
The causes, which interfere with the acquisition of truth, may also be
briefly pointed out. They are three-fold in their nature, and consist in want of
respect for the true Deva (God), the true guru (teacher) and the true shastra
(Scripture); for these are the only sources of right knowledge from without, and
it requires no great familiarly with logic to predict that he who ridicules any or
all of them necessarily denies the truth of their Word, and is thereby debarred
from the acquisition of truth. It is also worth while to understand the true
functions of these three objects of worship. God is worshipped, because He has
realized the Ideal of the soul, because he is a living example for every aspiring
Jiva, and because he is the true source of religion; the guru is revered because
he imparts true instruction and because without his practical help it would be
exceedingly difficult, though not impossible, to tread the thorny path of
Self-realization; and the claim of the Sastras to worship rests on the ground that
it is the last resort in case of doubt, and the only authority on matters which fall
outside the domain of intellect, such as the description of heavens and hells and
the like. The Scripture might, no doubt appear at times to be in conflict with
the conclusions arrived at by modern science, but it is necessary to bear in mind
the important fact that the dictum of science on those points on which it
conflicts with the Scriptural text is not based on anything approaching the
omniscience of the Arihanta, and is admittedly grounded on nothing more
certain than the weight of probability. Above all, the opinion of ill-trained men,
and even of scientists formed as the result of the demolition of mysticism and
misunderstood theology, is to be accepted with the greatest caution. These
gentlemen, finding the dogmatic preaching of certain obscure and incomplete
systems of theology unreasonable and opposed to the healthy voice of common
sense, are apt to make sweeping assertions about religion, holding every form
of it to be devoid of sense without properly studying the subject. If the seeker
after truth would not allow his mind to be swayed by imperfect or non-
exhaustive research, or one-sided statements of fact, and retain his composure
in the midst of the Babel of voices, he would, ere long, discover that there is
nothing intrinsically absurd in the Scripture of Truth even in respect of matters
not ascertainable with the intellect-- descriptions of heavens and hells, the past
history of saints and Saviors of mankind and the like. He would find that
intellect can neither prove nor disprove the Scriptural text in respect of these
matters with conclusive effect, so that he has to fall back upon the testimony of
the authors of the Scripture till the manifestation of the Avadhi, mnahparyaya
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

or Kevala Jnana puts an end to the controversy by enabling him to directly
perceive the truth for himself. The absolute accuracy of the text with regard to
all matters determinable by reason is a guarantee of its truthfulness even in
respect of those which fall beyond its legitimate province, and suffices to form
the basis of faith for the laity. In practice it will be seen that the more the
Scriptural text is found to be in agreement with the conclusions of an unbiased
mind, the greater is the respect, and, consequently, also, faith, which it will
engender in the heart.
The layman should begin by harnessing into service study and
meditation, which would speedily enable him to discern truth from falsehood,
and prevent him from falling into wrong and unworthy company. He must then
adopt the truth the moment it is discovered, and worship the true trinity of God,
guru and Sastras till he can stand on his own legs, that is to say till he can
manage to become absorbed in the contemplation of the own Atma. Neither the
fear of public opinion, the sense of ridicule not any other personal or private
motive should be allowed to stand in the way of adopting the right faith or to
constitute an excuse for a policy of procrastination, which not only delays and
retards one's own progress, but also misleads those others-- dependents, friends
and the like-- who naturally follow one's lead in matters pertaining to religion
and morality.
We come now to the second class of causes, which interfere with the
steadiness of Dhyana. These comprise all those tendencies and traits, including
passions and emotions which have their root in desire. Whenever the mind is
engrossed in the pursuit of desire it displays tendency to wander away after its
objects, thus robbing the soul of serenity and peace and the body of ease and
restfulness. The remedy for this kind of disturbance consists in the development
of the spirit of renunciation, which will engender the state of no desires.
The third type of causes of distraction have reference to the
unsteadiness of body, end a rise from want of control over the bodily limbs, ill
health, the habit of luxury i.e., inability to bear hardships, and the like. The
observance of rules, which directly aim at imparting health and strength to the
body, and the avoidance of the habits of luxury would be generally found
sufficient to bring the physical tabernacle of gross matter under the control of
will, and to render it capable of bearing the constantly increasing strain of trials
and hardships involved in the severest forms of self-denial. Food, it should be
clearly understood, plays the most important part in the physical training for
asceticism, since it directly affects the constitution of the body and the condition
of nerves which have to be purified of their grossness before they can respond
to the impulses of will in the desired manner. Hence, where impure food is
allowed to coarsen the brain and nerves, it is idle to expect any happy results
from the practicing of yoga (asceticism). The aspirant after immortality and
bliss must, therefore, make up his mind to exclude from its daily menu, all those
articles which augment the prostration of nerves together with those that do not
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

increase the vitality of the system. Meat and wine, which not only tend to
coarsen the nerves, but which also excite unholy passions and desires, at once
fall in the category of things to be avoided, and the same is the case with foods
that are hot, excessively sour, pungent, putrid, stale, unwholesome and those
which become tolerable after a time, such as tobacco, and the like cereals,
vegetables, fruits and nuts, along with milk and its different preparations
(clarified butter, sour-milk and the like), sugar and certain wholesome
condiments, go to build up a healthy body, and being delicious, bland and
nutritious in their nature, form the best articles of food. It should also be
observed here that the best results only follow an early attention to the rules of
diet and nervous hygiene, and that delay is not advisable in putting them into
practice.
Ease of posture (asanas) is also necessary for steadiness of Dhyana, since no
one can remain in an uncomfortable position for a long time. The general rule
with regard to posture is that one should stand or sit in such a way as to
produce the smallest amount of tension in his system, taking care at the same
time not to sacrifice the spirit of austerity for the love of bodily ease.
The following forms of asanas have been especially recommended in the
Scripture for the people of this age whose nerves and bones are of an inferior
type, as compared with those of the ancients:
(1) Paryanka or padma, the sitting posture-- holding the head, the chest and the
neck in a line, with legs crossed, and the gaze steadily fixed on the tip of the
nose; and
(2) Kharga, the standing posture with arms held naturally by the sides, but not
touching with the body, the feet placed at a distance of about two inches from
each other and the mind fixed on the point of the nose. If the rules of proper
conduct have been regularly observed, the Muni will acquire the ease of posture
with a little practice, and will be able to retain his seat as long as he pleases,
without being disturbed, otherwise he will have to undergo the preparatory
course before he can hope to subjugate his body sufficiently to have an easy
posture.
The selection of a suitable place for spiritual concentration is also
essential for practicing Dhyana, since external disturbance is a source of
distraction. The yogi should avoid those places , which are inhabited by cruel
heartless, selfish, irreligious or quarrelsome men, also those dedicated to false
gods and goddesses, and resort to those associated with the names of holy
Tirthankaras and saints. The abode of wild beasts, venomous reptiles, and the
like must also be avoided as far as possible, for similar reasons.
The next thing to be known is Pranayam, which means the controlling
of breath, and, through it, of the vital force. Pranayam is very useful for
bringing the senses and mind speedily under control, and consists in three steps,
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

Puraka (inhalation), kumbhaka (retention) and rechaka (exhalation). Puraka
signifies taking a full breath, kumbhaka holding it in the region of the navel, and
rechaka exhaling it slowly and evenly. Straining of every kind to be avoided in
practicing ascetic tapas (austerities), and this is so especially with regard to
Pranayam which might cause any amount of injury to the system if practiced
rashly or without due care and caution.
It might be pointed out here that the practicing of Pranayam is enjoyed
only in the initial stages of asceticism, when it serves as a useful ally for
subduing the senses and mind; it is actually forbidden in the advanced stages of
mediation on the ground that it then interferes with the fixing of mind on the
object of contemplation.
When sufficient proficiency is acquired in the practicing of Pranayam,
the next thing to do is to hold the inhaled breath and the mind in the region of
the lotus of the heart (the cardiac plexus). The holding of the mind on a point,
called pratyahara, becomes easy with this practice. There are ten places in the
body for mental concentration, viz.,
(i) The two eyes,
(ii) The two ears,
(iii) The foremost point of the nose,
(iv) Forehead,
(v) Mouth,
(vi) Naval,
(vii) The upper part of the forehead,
(viii) Heart,
(ix) Palate, and
(x) The place between the two eye- brows.
Pratyahara accompanied by meditation is called dharna, which really
means the establishing of the object of meditation in the mind. This being
accomplished, Dhyana becomes steady and may be kept up for any length of
time undisturbed. Some kind of meditation, no doubt, is implied in every form
of thinking, but the difference between the perfect Dhyana of the Muni and the
thought-master of his senses, body and mind, and may remain absorbed in
meditation for as long as a time as he pleases, the latter has never anything more
than an unsteady, wavering and feeble current of thought at his command. The
result is that while the yogi solves the riddle of the universe and ultimately also
establishes his soul in its natural, effulgent purity, the layman remains entangled
in the meshes of his karmas, however much he might boast of taking a hand in
the management of the world.
The instrument which enables the yogi to remove the Jnana-- and
darsana obstructing impurities of matter from his system is the point of his
highly concentrated Manas (attention or mind), which derives its energy from
an indomitable iron will bent upon the conquest of karmas. The sharp point of
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

this powerful instrument, when applied to the centers of concentration already
referred to, begins to pierce the layers of matter which compose the obstructing
veil, and in due course of time, the duration of which varies with the energies of
will in each individual case, cuts asunder the last knot of karma, flooding the
individual consciousness with the divine effulgence of omniscience and raising
the conquering Jiva to the supreme and worshipful status of Godhood.
Such is the physical process of emancipation, which is purely scientific
in its nature. As regards the length of time necessary for the realization of the
Ideal, that really depends on the intensity of Dhyana, or concentration of mind,
so that where the will has acquired the mastery of mind in the fullest possible
degree, an antaramahurata (a period of less than 48 minutes) is quite sufficient
to destroy the karmic bonds, while in other cases it may take millions and
millions of years.
Dhyana, it should be stated, is of four kinds:
(1) Arta Dhyana which is the cause of pain and arises from dwelling on
the loss of an object of desire, the association with an undesirable person or
thing, bodily suffering, and envy;
(2) Raudra Dhyana which implies the absorption of mind in Hinsa and
other forms of sin;
(3) Dharma Dhyana, that is meditation on the teaching of religion; and,
(4) Sukla Dhyana or the pure contemplation of one's own Atma.
Of these, the first two forms are obviously evil, but the third leads to
great felicity in the future re-birth of the soul (if any), and the last is the direct
cause of Moksha, that is freedom from the bondage of karmas and the turmoil's
of samsara.
Dharma Dhyana consists in thinking on the nature, condition and future
prospects and possibilities of the soul, the method of Self-realization, the form
of final release, the attributes of a Siddha Atma, and the like. The recitation and
reading of the holy scripture and Sastras, as well as of the biographies of saints
and virtuous laymen, meditation on the different Bhavanas (reflections) and
nature of Tattvas-- Jiva, Ajiva and the like-- the worshipping of defied Souls
and the reverence of those who have given up the world to lead the life of true
asceticism are also forms of the Dharma Dhyana.
There are the following types of religious meditation (Dharma Dhyana):
(i) Anga- vichaya, or meditation with the aid of Scripture,
(ii) Apaya- vichaya, that is dwelling on the means for the destruction of
karmas,
(iii) Vipaka-vichaya which means reflecting on the effect of karmas, and
(iv) Samsthana-vichaya, or reflection on the nature of the universe and
the conditions of life prevailing therein.
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

Both the layman and the ascetic derive material aid from religious
meditation (Dharma Dhyana), which when intelligently practiced never fails to
engender the spirit of true Vairagya (renunciation) of the soul, and prepares in
for the practicing of the Sukla, i.e., the highest form of Dhyana.
Sukla Dhyana, in its purest form, signifies an unbroken contemplation
of one's own Atma and cannot be realized so long as the all illumining Kevala
Jnana does not arise in the consciousness of the Jiva. The preparatory course
for the realization of the Sukla Dhyana, therefore, consists in the two-fold
method of concentration and meditation, which give rise to the Kevala Jnana
and fix the form of 'thought'.
If the reader would bear in mind the fact that belief is the builder of
character and that the essence of the soul is pure intelligence which is influenced
by its own beliefs to such an extent that it actually becomes what it believes
itself to be, he would not find it difficult to understand that steadiness of mind is
not possible without there being a corresponding fixing of belief in the first
instance. Hence, belief must first mould the essence of spirit before any
permanent results are to be expected. To this end the Scripture enjoins the
practicing of the following kinds of Dhyana in the final stages of asceticism:
(1) Pindastha Dhyana, which consists of five dharna (forms of
contemplation) as follows:
(a) Prithvi dharna. The yogi should imagine a boundless ocean of the
size of madhya Loka, motionless and noiseless, of the color of milk, with a hug
resplendent lotus of a thousand petals and having a bright yellow pericarp of
the height of Mount Meru in its center. On the top of his pericarp he should
place in his imagination, a throne of the brightness of moon, and should
imagine himself seated on this throne, in a calm and peaceful attitude of mind,
firmly established in the belief that is Atma is fully capable of destroying the
eight kinds of karmas which hold him in captivity and bondage.
(b) Agneyi dharna. When the prithi dharna become firmly fixed in the
mind, the yogi should imagine himself seated as before, and should further
imagine a small lotus of sixteen petals in the region of his navel, with the sixteen
vowels, (a), (a-), (e), (i), (u). (u-), (ri), (ri-), (lri), (lri-), (ai), (aei), (au), (aou),
(ang) and (ah), inscribed on its sixteen petals (one on each) and the holy syllable
(the middle part of the word, Arihanta) on its pericarp, shining like burnished
gold. He should then imagine smoke slowly emanating from the upper stroke
of the holy syllable and, assuming the form of a flame of fire, scorching and
burning up, in the region of the heart, another lotus of eight petals representing
the eight kinds of karmas. The fire as finally to be imagined as having spread to
all parts of the body, surrounding it in the form of a triangle, and reducing it to
ashes.
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

(c) Asavasani dharna, which consists in the contemplation of powerful
winds blowing away the ashes of the body from the soul, and scattering them
about in the four directions.
(d) Varuni dharna. The yogi now imagines a great down pour of the
rain which washes away the remnants of the ashes of the body from the soul,
leaving the latter in the condition of its natural purity, that is as the pure
effulgence of intelligence.
(e) Tattva- rupavati dharna. The yogi now contemplates his soul as the
possessor of all the divine attributes and qualities, having an effulgent 'body' of
pure, radiant will, free from all kinds of karmas and material encasements, and
the object of worship and adoration on the part of Devas and men.
(2) Padastha Dhyana which means contemplation with the aid of holy mantras
(sacred formulas), such as namoarhantanam, and the concentration of mind on
the centers of Dhyana.
(3) Rupastha Dhyana consisting in the contemplation of the holy form of
Arihanta (Tirthankara), seated in the celestial pavilion attended by Indras
(rulers of Devas or heavenly kings), of radiant, effulgent glory, spreading peace
and joy all round.
(4) Rupatita Dhyana, or meditation on the attributes of the Siddha Atma. This
form of Dhyana consists in the contemplation of the pure qualities of the
perfect, bodiless Souls accompanied with the belief that he who is engaged in
meditation is also endowed with the same attributes.
The above are the different forms of Dhyana which lead to what is called
nirvikalpa Samadhi, the purest form of self- contemplation. In this state the
necessity for thinking is replaced by the all-illumining, all-embracing Kevala
Jnana (omniscience), and the soul directly perceives itself to be the most
glorious, the most blissful, the all-knowing and all- powerful being, and
becomes absorbed in tile enjoyment of its Svabhavik (natural) Ananda free from
all kinds of impurities and bonds.
We have already sufficiently described the nature of the Pindastha Dhyana; thc
padastha need not be dwelt upon any longer in this book, since a knowledge of
Sanskrit is necessary for its practicing; but the Rupastha and the Rupatita forms
of contemplation deserve a word of explanation. Of these, the former, i.e. the
Rupastha, is the form of the Bhakti- Marga, par excellence, since it directly
enables the soul to attain to the form and status of God. The form of the Parma
Atma is first intellectually determined and then contemplated upon with
unwavering fixing of attention, till it become indelibly fixed in the mind. This
being accomplished, the ascetic now resorts to the fourth form of Dhyana the
Rupatita, and with its aid transfers the impress of the Parma Atma from his
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

mind to the essence of his Jiva or soul-substance, which, in obedience to the
law-- as one thinks so one becomes-- itself assumes that very form, manifesting,
at the same time, in the fullest degree, the attributes of perfection and divinity
arising from the action of the concentrated point of attention on the matter of
the nervous centers, as described before. The transference of the conception of
Parma Atma from the mind, or intellect, to the soul-substance is beautifully
allegorized, in the Vishnu Purana, as the removal of the embryo of Krishna from
the womb of Rohini to that of her co-wife, Devaki, Krishna being the ideal of
Godhood or perfection for the soul. The idea is that the conception of divinity is
first formed in the mind or intellect,* and is thence transferred to the soul-
substances which, assuming its form, itself becomes 'Krishna' (God).
(*The intellectual origin of Christos is also recognized by the ho1y Bible which
describes the Messiah as a carpenter's son. Now, since a carpenter's work
consists in cutting (analysis) and joining together (synthesis), he is as good a
symbol for the intellectual faculty as any that can be thought of.) The same is
the explanation of the teaching of the Svetambara sect of Jainas who hold that
the last holy Tirthankara, Shri Vardhamana- Mahavira was, first conceived in
the womb of a Brahman lady and thence transferred to that of Queen Trisala.
The Brahman caste being noted for learning, the Brahman lady clearly becomes
symbolical of intellect in whose womb the Tirthankara' (Godhood) is first
conceived.
It will not be out of place here to point out the nature of the trouble, which is
sure to arise from a concentration of mind on an erroneous, or fanciful, concept
of the divine form. Since the intensity of concentration tends on to establish the
soul-substance in the form of the object of contemplation, he who holds in his
mind any ill-shaped misconceived or distorted image of divinity would be
throwing his soul into a wrong mould, the impress of which it would not be an
easy matter to destroy.
This is not all, for the requisite degree of the intensity of concentration also is
not possible where the mind is liable to be stirred or moved in the wrong
direction; hence the manifestation of Kevala Jnana is out of the question for
those who fix their minds on Kudeva (false divinity). For instance, the act of
contemplation of a dancing 'God' can only result in establishing the soul in a
dancing attitude, which, the moment it becomes strongly marked, would
interrupt all further concentration of mind in the right direction.
The form of divinity is not that of a dancer nor, of a climber of trees the true
Godhood is the perfection of the noblest attributes of the soul the peace,
tranquillity, renunciation, self-control, equanimity and the like, and must be
contemplated as such. The Parma Atma has nothing to conceal, nor to be
ashamed of; He wears neither clothes nor ornaments, nor does He embellish His
'person' otherwise. Shant (full of peace), serene and self-centered, He sits,
unmoving and unmoved in the contemplation of his own effulgent glory,
indifferent to the praises of the Bhavya and the abuses of the Abhavya. Such is
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

the true object of contemplation which is to be found only in the consecrated
pratibimbas (images) of the holy Tirthankaras in a Jaina Temple.
It may also be pointed out here that those who try to attain the purity of
Dhyana by dispensing with concentration on the form of the Tirthankara are
not likely to achieve any happy results. They are like those who try to reach the
top of the ladder without the help of its rungs. It is true that constant
meditation on the qualities of the Parma Atma, accompanied with the belief
that the same qualities inhere in every Jiva, goes a long way towards making
one self- conscious, but it is no less true that the full acceptance of the impress
of the form of Parma Atma by the soul-substance, which is necessary to prevent
its fickleness and unsteadiness, cannot be secured till the yogi knows what that
impress is like and the method of transferring it from his mind to the 'liquid'
essence of his soul. The knowledge of the form of the Parma Atma being,
th8us, a pre-requisite of Moksha, true Bhakti can not be said to begin unless the
mind of the devotee is first filled with the divine image. There can be no such
thing as falling in love with a being or thing whose very form one has no idea
of.
In this connection we may also explain the significance of the word
nirakara when used in reference to Parma Atma. Obviously everything that
exists must have some kind of form, so that the word nirakara, if taken in its
literal sense, i.e., as devoid of form (nir = without, and akara = form), cannot
possible apply to any existent thing. It is however, applicable to soul or spirit,
firstly, because it has no visible form which, may be perceived with the eye, and,
secondly because the Jiva involved in the cycle of births and deaths has no
permanent form of his own. The Parma Atma, however, differs from the
ordinary not emancipated Jiva in so far as the destruction of all kinds of karmas
places Him for ever beyond the cycle of re-births fixing His form also,
incidentally, once for all and for ever in the manner described in the tenth
chapter of The Key of Knowledge. This form is the noblest form of all, being
that of perfect MANHOOD, and the stature of the soul-substance, which on the
attainment of complete liberation is freed from the liability to expansion and
contraction in the manner of an involved Jiva, is slightly less than that of the
body from which nirvana is attained. Those who might find it difficult to
reconcile this view of the Jaina Siddhanta with the prevailing notions of the
Hindus and others who maintain that nirvana signifies an absorption into the
deity-- the merging of the drop in the sea-- would find it easier to understand
the nature of the form of the Siddha Atma in Moksha if they would only take
the trouble to analyze the idea underlying the notion of absorption. It is no use
trying to smother the voice of intellect when it proclaims that two or more
existing realities, or individuals, can never be pressed into one; and neither
reason nor analogy can ever be found to support the thesis of the absolute
merger in respect of simple, indivisible entities. The very illustration of the
disappearance of the drop in the sea is a sufficient refutation of all such notions;
for the sea is an unit only in so far as the word is concerned, not in any other
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

respect, so that the 'individuality' of the drops constituting its volume is neither
destroyed nor impaired in the least in the process of their supposed merger. It
is, no doubt, impossible for us to pick out any particular drop were invested
with the functions of understanding and speech it would undoubtedly respond
to a call from a friend on the shore.
The true idea underlying the analogy, then, is only that of a collection of
'drops' enjoying a common status, which is fully in agreement with the Jaina
view, according to which the Siddha Atma in Nirvana enjoy the status of
Godhood but retain their individualities separate and distinct from others. Thus,
the status is one though there is no limit to the number of individuals acquiring
or attaining to it.
We gain nothing by denying the fact that we must have a clear
conception of a thing before we can ever hope to acquire it; and the necessity
of being scrupulously precise is even greater in the spiritual realm where the
soul's aim and ambition are centered round in ideal which it wishes to realize in
its own self. It follows from this that the fullest information rather than a
negative description --neti, neti, (not this, not this) -- concerning the great ideal
of perfection and joy must be insisted upon, at the very outset, by an earnest
seeker after Moksha. Existence, it will be noticed, is not the attribute of
anything in nature which is not possessed of a single positive content of
knowledge, so that where every conceivable attribute is negatived there remains
nothing but non-existence to stare the philosopher in the face. If those who
insist upon defining an existing being or thing in this negative manner would
only analyze the nature of speech, they would not fail to perceive that the
converse of rational beings consists in the expression of ideas clearly conceived
by the mind, and that it is impossible to have an idea of a thing which is
absolutely devoid of all elements of affirmation and certainty. Hence, it is very
clear that those who describe the Godhead in terms of negation have really no
idea of the supreme status, which the soul is to attain on obtaining Nirvana.
The idea of Moksha cannot also be clear to the minds of those who look
upon the world as an illusion with a solitary soul as the only reality and the true
substratum of life in all forms. For either this all- pervading soul does not stand
in need of Moksha or it is to attain it at some future moment of time; but in the
former case it is impossible to explain the longing of living beings for a taste of
true happiness and in the latter the very possibility of the attainment of
perfection and bliss by different individuals is excluded by the hypothesis itself,
because where the substratum of individual life is a solitary soul there can be no
release except for all living beings at one and the same time. Furthermore, the
idea of Moksha for the individuals, cannot, on such a supposition possible mean
anything more or less than utter, absolute annihilation of individuality, since the
emancipation of the only true soul must be a signal for the exeunt of all others.
It is thus evident that no true concept of Moksha is possible on such a
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

hypothesis, and since the realization of the great ideal of the soul is not
compatible with a vague or inconsistent conception thereof in the mind of the
aspiring Jiva, no one who pins his faith on such a doctrine is likely to reach 'the
other shore'. And, so far as practicability, the only true test of utility, is
concerned, it is evident that no one can be said to have been benefited by the
doctrine hitherto, for the one soul is still subject to illusions and there has never
been another to be redeemed.
STAGES ON THE PATH
Gunasthan
From the nature of Moksha and the means prescribed for its realization it is
abundantly clear that the attainment of perfection is the culmination of a
graduated course of training, which must be followed step by step. The sages
have, therefore, divided the path, which leads to the Supreme Seat (Nirvana)
into fourteen stages, each of which represents a particular state of development,
condition or phase of the soul, arising from the quiescence, elimination, or
partial quiescence and partial elimination of certain energies of karma, and the
manifestation of those traits and attributes which are held in check by their
activity. The names and characteristics of each of these fourteen stages, called
Gunasthan, may be stated as follows:--
(1) The first stage is called Mithyatva, which signifies ignorance, the
normal condition of all Jivas involved in the samsara, and is the starting point
of spiritual evolution. The consciousness of the soul in this condition is
obsessed with gross ignorance, and pure truth is not agreeable to it. Those who
pass out of it are the lucky ones who, in consequence of their past good
karmas, evolve out the desire to find a way to escape from the pain and misery
of life in this world. When a man reaches this turning point in his life, he begins
to meditate on the nature of the world and on his own relation with it. This
results in a temporary quiescence of the first three energies of darsana
Mohaniya karma (Nos. 17, 18 and 19) and the Anantanubandhi type of anger,
pride, deceit and greed (Nos. 20,21,22 and 23), producing what is called the
prathamopasama- samyaktva --a kind of faith which generally subsides, sooner
or later, like the effervescence of aerated water. All cases of sudden conversion
to truth are due to the quiescence of these seven energies of karmas.
The subsequent loss of faith is due to the recrudescence of the prakriti
of any one of the Anantanubandhi kasha's (anger, pride, deceit and greed)
whose destruction or quiescence is related to the manifestation of true insight as
cause to its effect.
(2) Sasadana (sa = with + Sadhana = exhausted, hence that which is
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

characterized by exhausted faith). This Gunasthan represents the mental state
of the soul in the process or act of 'falling' form right faith. Its duration is
momentary and does not extend beyond the time actually needed for the fast-
slipping faith to be replaced by a false conviction in the mind.
(3) Misra (lit. mixed). The consciousness of the Jiva in this stage is
characterized by a hovering between certainty and doubt as to the word of
Faith.
This Gunasthan also marks a state of back-sliding from Right Faith, in
the first instance, since faith and Mithyatva can become combined in the
consciousness of him alone who has already evolved out proper convictions.
(4) Avirati - Samyagdrishti. When the doubts of an individual have
been removed by meditation or the instruction of a guru (preceptor), he passes
on to this stage, and becomes a Samyagdrishti (true believer); but as he is not
yet able to observe any of the vows enjoined on a layman, he is still described as
Avirati (a= not + virta = a vow). This stage arises when the seven prakriti
already named have been wholly or partially subdued or destroyed, and denotes
the acquisition of Right Faith. Anger, pride, deceit and greed of the
Apratyakhyana type may be subdued here.
(5) Desavirata (desa = partial + vrata = vow). The soul now begins to
observe some of the rules of Right Conduct with a view to perfect itself. The
Pratyakhyana type of passions (kasha's) may be controlled in this stage.
(6) Pramatta vrata (slightly imperfect vows). The aharaka Shareer
prakriti (No. 60) becomes nascent at this stage which is the first step of life as a
Muni.
(7) Apramatta vrata (perfect observance of vows). The conduct of the
Muni (ascetic) in this stage is marked by the absence of Pramad (negligence).
(8) Apurva karana (Apurva = new + karana = thoughts or mental
stages). The conduct being perfect, so far as the observance of vows is
concerned, the Jiva now applies himself to holy meditation (Sukla Dhyana.)
Some of the no- kasayas got rid of in this stage.
(9) Anivritti karana (advanced thought activity). This is a more
advanced stage than the preceding one.
(10) Sukshma sampraya (sukshma = very slight + sampraya = conflict,
hence struggle to control the kasayas or delusion). Only the slightest form of
greed, which is also fully under control, remains to be eradicated in this stage.
(11) Upasanta Moha (Upasanta, from upasama = quiescence + Moha =
delusion). This stage arises from the subsidence of the energies of the
Mohaniya karma.
(12) Kshina Moha (destruction of delusion). Complete eradication of
the Mohaniya karma is the chief characteristic of this stage. It should be
pointed out here that the path bifurcates at the end of the seventh stage, one
route lying along what is known as upasama sreni (upasama = subsided or
quiescent, and sreni = flight of steps, hence ascent) and the other along the
kshayaka (eradication). The former path finds its culmination in the eleventh
stage, that is the total suppression, but not destruction, of the Mohaniya
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

karmas; but the other which is trodden by those who are not content with the
mere subsidence of karmic energies, and who, rejecting half measures, proceed
by destroying the 'enemy' once for all and for ever, is the high road to Nirvana.
Those who follow it pass directly from the tenth to the twelfth stage, and,
acquiring omniscience as the reward of their unyielding, unflinching asceticism,
reach the Supreme Seat. The saint who reaches the Upasanta Moha stage falls
back to a lower one, and keeps on travelling backwards and forwards between
the first and the eleventh station on the line till he is able to gird up his loins to
tread the more trying and difficult kshayaka path.
(13) Sayoga kevali (sa = with, yoga, the three channels of activity, i.e., mind,
speech and body, and kevali = omniscient). This is the stage of Jivana Mukti,
characterized by the total destruction of the four kinds of Ghatia karmas, but
indicating the association with the physical body due to the operation of certain
Aghatia prakriti. Those who evolve out the Tirthankara prakriti become the
Master (Tirthankara) who reveals the true Dharma (religion). Surrounded by
Devas and men who hie from all quarters to offer Him devotion, the
Tirthankara explains the truth in the divine anakshari * language, which is
interpreted into popular speech, for the benefit of the masses, by an advanced
disciple and Muni called Ganadhara.
(*It is somewhat difficult to give an exact description of the anakshari
speech; it consists of the powerful, audible vibrations of the Tirthankaras will
become omnipotent by the destruction of the Ghatia karmas. These vibrations
impinge on the mind of the congregation in a manner akin to the process of
thought-transference of the telepathic type, and are at the time heard by all who
understand them in their own tongues. Subsequently they are translated into
popular speech and constitute what is called Agama (Scripture). The ordinary
mode of conversation is not possible for the Tirthankara on account of the
changes wrought by Tapa in His organs of speech.) The truth thus known is
called sruti (revelation), or Sruta Jnana, and its absolute accuracy is guaranteed
by the faculty of omniscience which does not come into manifestation so long
as there remains the least trace of any of the energies of the Mohaniya karma.
(14) Ayoga kevali (Ayoga, without mind, speech and body, and kevali,
omniscient). This is the last stage on the Path, and is followed by the soul's
ascent to Nirvana on the exhaustion of the Aghatia karmas. The Jiva who
passes this stage is called Siddha. He has now become fully established in Right
Faith, Right Knowledge and Right Conduct, and is freed from all kinds of
karmic impurities and bonds, which had hitherto held him in captivity. No
longer subject to the de-pressing influence of matter. He rises up immediately
to the topmost part of the universe to reside there, for ever, in the enjoyment of
all those divine attributes, which many of us have never even dreamt of. A
conqueror in the true sense of the word, He now enjoys, to the full, the fruit of
His unflinching fight with His own lower nature. Pure intelligence in essence,
He now becomes an embodiment of knowledge by bursting His bounds. Thus,
what some people consider to be a stultification of character is really the
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

acquisition of such godly qualities as perfect discernment or faith, infinite
knowledge, inexhaustible power and pure non-abating joy. The Ideal of
absolute Perfection, the Siddha becomes the object of worship for all the
Bhavya (those who have the potentiality to attain Nirvana) Jivas in the three
worlds; and what language can describe the glory of that Siddha Atma, the
mere contemplation of whose worshipful feet is sufficient to destroy all kinds
of karmas of His Bhaktas (devotees)?
To revert to the subject under consideration, it will be observed that the
arrangement of the Gunasthan is based not upon any artificial division of the
'path', but upon the natural effects observable in the being who takes himself
scientifically in hand to control his destiny. No serious student of religion
stands in need of being told that of all kinds of Tapa the Antaranga is the
principal cause of emancipation, though the physical control of the bodily
functions and organs is also necessary for bringing the wandering Manas (the
organ of desires) under subjection. It follows from this that the best results can
only flow from a system which scientifically deals with the subject of internal
Tapa, and that no method which ignores or minimizes the importance of this
most important department of self- training can ever be relied upon as a means
for escape from the bondage of karmas. Applying these observations to the
non-Jaina systems of Tapa (yoga), it can be seen at a glance that none of them
is possessed of that scientific validity which alone can be depended upon for the
realization of the ideal in view. Indeed, almost all of them in the end leave the
aspiring soul in the greatest uncertainty as to the effect of the practices enjoined
and the exercises laid down by them; and even the more perfected systems of
Hindu yoga-- Jnana yoga, raja yoga, Bhakti yoga, Hatha yoga and karma
yoga- -do little more than point out the direction in which lies the way out of
the samsara, intersected by paths that certainly do not lead to Nirvana, but only
to the four Gatis, or conditions, of life. That the unwary traveler needs
something more than a mere indication of the direction to pick out the right
track is a matter which is not open to dispute; and the importance of accurate
scientific knowledge is an absolute necessity where a single false step might
prove one's undoing. The Jaina Siddhanta has throughout kept these principles
in view in its schematic arrangement of the stages on the journey, and the
intelligent tyro is merely required to make himself familiar with the nature of
the karma prakriti to know precisely what to do at any particular moment of
time in the course of his onward progress on the Path.
To understand the philosophy underlying the arrangement of the
Gunasthan, it is necessary to bear in mind the fact that the attainment of every
ideal requires:
(i) The determination to know the precise truth, i.e., the proper attitude of
inquiry.
(ii) Exact knowledge of the thing to be attained, together with a steady,
unchanging belief, or faith, in the possibility of its attainment, and
(iii) Exertion in the right direction, that is the proper conduct.
To put the same thing in the language of the Jaina Siddhanta, Right
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

Faith, Right Knowledge, and Right Conduct are the three jewels, which enable
their possessor to enter into the holy Abode of Gods. Of these three, Right
Faith*(Samyag darshan) precedes Right Knowledge, (Samyag gyan) while
Right Conduct (Samyag Charitra) is a characteristic of those alone who have
almost perfected themselves in wisdom and faith.
(*The word faith, it may be pointed out here, is a somewhat unsuitable
equivalent for the 'Samyag darsana' of the Jaina Siddhanta, though usually
employed as such. The idea underlying Samyag darsana, described as the
cause of Samyag Jnana, is that of a proper insight into the nature of things
which is necessary for the knowledge of truth. The man who acquires this true
insight, or point of view, is characterized by an attitude of mind determined to
know the precise truth at all costs, as distinguished from that which may be
satisfied with half-truths, agreeable to one's preconceived or prejudiced views.
This attitude would naturally give rise to right knowledge in due course of time,
and would it self arise, as stated in Jaina Philosophy, on the destruction, or
quiescence, or partial destruction and dispassionate judgment. These energies
comprise the three kinds of anger, pride, deceit and greed (Nos. 17-19) and the
anantanu Bandh type of the four kasayas, anger, pride, deceit and greed (Nos.
20-23). Thus, Samyag darsana is as much the natural attribute of the soul as
Samyag Jnana, and is brought into manifestation by the destruction or
loosening of the karmic bonds.
So far, however, as faith is concerned, it might signify assent to the
word of another or firmness of belief. It is acquired either as the result of study
or meditation, or under the influence of surroundings, as in the case of parental
religion which men generally adopt without inquiry. Knowledge is, however,
necessary in either case to keep it from wandering away from rationalism, for
faith without knowledge is only a form of fanaticism, incipient or full fledged.
The casual connection between knowledge and faith, therefore, is to be
found in the fact that rational faith pre-supposes some sort of intellectual
inquiry or investigation, notwithstanding the fact that right knowledge is itself
dependent on right faith. The dependence of right knowledge on right faith is
evident in respect of those matters at least which fall outside the province of
perception and reason; for such knowledge is a matter of testimony, and
depends on the word of the Teacher, which cannot be acceptable to those who
have yet to evolve out the right faith. It would thus appear that knowledge and
faith are to some extent dependent on each other; knowledge leading to right
faith in the first instance, and right faith giving rise to right knowledge in the
end.
The dependence of right knowledge on right darsana implies that no
true insight can be had into the nature of things without it. It is not to be
supposed that there is no difference whatever between the knowledge of a man
endowed with right faith and of him who is involved in Mithyatva. There is, no
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

doubt, a superficial resemblance between their ideas, to some extent, but that is
confined to the surface of things. For instance, they may both know
consciousness to be the distinguishing feature of life, but it is the true believer
alone who also knows it to be an independent reality, eternal, undying and
capable of enjoying the freedom and joy of Gods. This knowledge is not shared
by the other man, who is, consequently, debarred from striving to obtain the
bliss and blessedness pertaining to divinity, since no one ever tries for that
which he does not know or believe to be attainable, or true.) Hence, the earliest
stages of the journey are necessarily those, which mark the transition from the
state of settled wrong convictions to the acquisition of true faith.
The next thing to be attended to is conduct without which it is not possible to
realize the ideal in view. Hence the remaining Gunasthan are the landmarks on
the path of progress in respect of Right Conduct. The eight and the ninth
stages are also characterized by increased meditation, hence concerned in the
advancement of knowledge; but to follow the teaching of the Siddhanta on the
still higher rungs of the ladder, it is necessary to remember that perfection in
conduct means neither more nor less than the attainment of the state of non-
desiring which is possible only with the complete eradication of all those traits
which spring from desire.
Now, desire signifies greed, the immediate cause of deceitfulness. Greed also
leads to pride by focusing attention on the physical personality and by
augmenting the sense of agouti; and pride and greed combined give birth to
anger. Thus, greed is the root of the remaining three forms of kasayas
(passions) and the most difficult mental trait to be destroyed. It cannot be
eradicated before the twelfth stage for this reason. Omniscience is manifested
in the thirteenth stage, while the fourteenth is like an ante- room to Nirvana.
For facility of reference we give the main features of the Gunasthan in the
accompanying tabulated form.
Main features of the fourteen stages.
Serial Names of
Number. gunastha- Characteristics
nas.
1 Mithyatva, Gross ignorance
2 Sasadana. Vanishing Faith, i.e., the condition of
mind while actually falling down from the fourth to
the first stage.
3 Misra. Mixed faith and false belief.
4 Avirata- Right faith, unaccompanied by austerities
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

samyaga
dristi
5 Desavirata Commencement of Right
Conduct.
6 Pramatta. The formation of the aharaka Shareer,
and observance of vows though tinged with
Pramad (carelessness or laziness). This is the
first stage of life as a Muni, i.e., of homelessness.
7 Apramatta. Elimination of Pramad, and partial
realization of the Svabhavik Ananda, i.e., joy.
8 Apurva Noted for the new channels of karana.
thought, thrown open by the
purification of the mind
and the quiescence of the elements of disturbance.
9 Anivritti More advanced thought-activity, i.e.,
meditation.
karana
10 Sukshma Only very slight greed left to be
samparaya. controlled.
11 Upasanta- Quiescence of the remaining
Moha traces of greed.
12 Kshina- Desirelessness, i.e., the complete
Moha. eradication of greed, hence perfection
in Right Conduct.
13 Sayoga- Omniscience, hence the perfection
Right Knowledge, and the
realization of the state of Jivan- Mukti, that is
liberation in the embodied state. In the ease of Tirthankaras
revelation also takes place in this stage.
14 Ayoga- The cessation of the activity of three
yoga, i.e., the channels of Asrava. The next
step takes one to Nirvana.
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

A glance at the above table would suffice to show that the liability to
fall back to the earlier stages is completely shaken off only on reaching the
state of no desire at the twelfth Gunasthan, since greed, the mother of the
remaining three forms of kasha's and the root of all other minor passions and
emotions, is eradicated only at the moment of stepping from the
suksmasamparaya to the Kshina Moha state. Other forms of passions and
emotions, such as superciliousness, envy and the like, are really the progeny of
the four principal kasha's alluded to above, and have not been specifically
treated for this reason; they disappear with the drying up of their respective
sources. The complete eradication of greed simply means their total destruction
and the full manifestation of all the divine attributes and properties of the soul,
now become defied by the destruction of its Ghatia karmas.
It only remains to study the working of the diverse karma prakriti in
respect to study the working of the diverse karma prakriti in respect of their
engendering, fruition and elimination. Obviously, all these energies cannot
become active at one and same time, since some of them are counter indicated
by those of an antagonistic nature which may be in actual play, e.g., one cannot
have a human and an animal body at the same time, though a human being may
contract the liability to the reborn as an animal, and vice versa. Hence, bandha
does not signify immediate fruition of karmas, but only the liability to undergo
certain experience at some future moment of time. This liability is contracted,
as already pointed out, in consequence of the fusion of spirit and matter, and
remains in abeyance till it finds a suitable opportunity for its operation in
consequence of the subsidence of the activity of the particular energies which
hold it in check. Thus there are three different aspects of the karmic force,
namely, Satta (potentiality), bandha and Udaya (rising, hence fruition or
activity), which have to be taken into account in a systematic treatment of the
subject. The following tabular statement will show at a glance at what stage
which of the karma prakriti are engendered, rendered inactive and destroyed.
If the reader would only bear in mind the fact that a karma prakriti is not
necessarily destroyed when it is rendered inactive, he would not find any
difficulty in studying the table, though for fuller explanation he would still have
to consult such works as the Gommattasara which contains a wealth of detailed
information on subject.
DHARMA IN PRACTICE
The reader who has followed us thus far could not have failed to notice the
correspondence between the injunctions of the Scripture and the divine attributes of pure
spirit, which come into manifestation by their observance. The fact is that Dharma is the
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

nature of the soul itself, so that its ten features-- forgiving, and the like, described on page
52 ante --only represent the natural and divine attributes, for traits of 'character', i.e.,
'disposition,' of a pure, perfect soul.
This natural purity (Dharma) increases by practice, imparting fresh vigor and strength to
the soul at every forward step. It is for this reason that Dharma is competent to support
and sustain a soul in the moment of temptation and trial, and possesses sufficient energy to
carry it to 'the other shore' --the 'land' of Perfection and Bliss. It has, however, to be
adopted before its assistance can be availed of in the fullest degree, though the practicing
of any of its injunctions --even in a second-hand* manner --is bound to bear appropriate
fruit.
(*The natural correspondence between Dharma and the divine attributes of the soul is
possible only where religion is placed on a scientific basis, and is not to be found in those
cases where faith is tinged with superstition or error, except in so far as they embody the
borrowed precepts of a scientific creed. Those who practice such borrowed injunctions
are said to follow them in a second-hand manner.)
For this reason, it is possible for a soul on the Mithyatva Gunasthan to attain to human
form, or even to a re-birth in one of the heavens, by performing virtuous deeds and Tapa
respectively, though its ignorance of the nature of Dharma is even then sure to drag it into
less agreeable and unpleasant surroundings. Moksha is, however, altogether out of the
question for those who do not follow the true path, and the possibility of acquiring a
human, or Deva, birth is also dependent on a rigid adherence to the rules of virtuous living
and Tapa which are more liable to be disregarded by one involved in ignorance and
falsehood than by him who knows the nature of Tattvas. It is to be born in mind that the
nature of Hinsa and vice, the respective causes of life in hell and the Tiryanch kingdom,
has to be properly understood before one can ever hope to avoid them altogether, so that
in a general way it is true to say that only the follower of the right path can enjoy complete
immunity from the liability to descend into hells or to be re-born in the animal or still
lower kingdom.
If the reader has followed us thus far, he would have no further difficulty in agreeing with
us as to the supreme necessity for the adoption of the true faith at as early a period in life
as possible, for where the enemy to be overpowered is the formidable energy of karma
which acquires additional strength with every false step, evil thought, and harmful,
careless, action, where the forces of existence might come to an end in the most tragic and
least expected manner, and where there is no security, or certainty, of life even in the very
next moment, the least delay in turning to the true path is liable to have the most
calamitous consequences for the soul. It should never be allowed to escape the mind that
all evil traits of character, arising from the activity of speech, mind or body, have to be
eradicated before the attainment of final emancipation can be brought within the pale of
practicability, and that every action repeated a number of times becomes habitual and
makes it all the more difficult activity. With the advance of age, habits become more
firmly rooted and the tenacity with which old people stick to the notions imbedded in the
earlier period old life is well known. Finally, when the powers of the body and mind have
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

become too enfeebled by age to bear the severe strain of training required for the
understanding and practicing of religion, blankness of despair alone remains staring one in
the face. Add to this the fact that the human birth is very difficult to obtain, so that he
who wastes his opportunity now may have, for ages to come, to wander in the lower
grades of life where the soul is generally too much overburdened with karmic impurities to
acquire the truth or to be benefited thereby. He who delays in respect of the
ascertainment and adoption of truth, therefore, is the greatest enemy of himself.
It is also essential that our children should be imparted the truth and trained, in their very
infancy, to a life of severe rigidity required by religion, for childhood is the age of
impressionability, and the mind of infancy is like a green twig which may be bent as
desired. The method which the ancients found most useful for the training of their
children, aimed at (1) impressing the mind with the greater importance of obtaining
spiritual emancipation over secular gain, and (2) the actual building up of character, so
that by the time the pupil completed the course of study he became a perfect model of a
gentleman and self-abnegation in the true sense of the words. He might be the son of a
king or millionaire, but that made no difference to him; his conduct was always righteous
and becoming for the subjugation of lust and greed, the two principal causes of all evil
tendencies and traits, left his mind ever pure and tranquil and bent on the realization of the
true ideal of the soul. While with the teacher --usually a man known as much for piety as
learning --he was called upon to live in conformity with the strictest rules of the Brahma
Acharya ashram (conduct prescribed for a pupil)--serving the master, refraining from
marriage and lustful thoughts, studying Scripture and the like. This course of early
training always stood him in good stead in the midst of the trials and temptations of youth,
enabling him to bring under his control such powerful enemies of the soul as pride, deceit,
anger and other similar passions and emotions. As he grew up, he found himself called
upon to practice those virtues of self control, toleration, equanimity and love which, when
perfected, mark the conduct of holy ascetics and saints. In due course he became the head
of his family, relieving his elders of the duties of management of the estate, and enabling
them to retire from active participation in the worldly concerns of life, and hoping to be
similarly relieved by his juniors, in his own turn, in the fullness of time. At times he also
had to provide for his destitute relations, but he never grumbled at the fruit of his labor
being enjoyed by the less fit, or non-earning members of his household, and always
considered it his good fortune to be able to help others. Wealth had lost all its blinding
glamour for him in his infancy, and he knew full well how much easier it was for a camel
to 'pass through the needle's eye' than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven,
for the cares and worries consequent on the management of riches and the sense of
attachment to the thing of the world have always been known to stand in the way of
retirement from active life, preparatory to the adoption of the stage of homeless wandering
which is necessary to attain Nirvana.
The proper training of children, thus, is a valuable asset, and of immense help to
them in their after life. It is a legitimate deduction from this that early marriage is an
institution, which must necessarily interfere with the proper training of the soul. Besides,
it directly tends to introduce misery into the life of a family by:
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

(1) The union of people who have neither an idea of the sexual function, nor a voice in the
selection of their nuptial partner,
(2) The procreation of the period of self-control,
(3) The procreation of unfit, ill- formed and ill- nourished children,
(4) The occasional death of the female parent during confinement,
(5) The increase of poverty, and
(6) The interruption of religious education generally.
It is not necessary to comment upon these six categories of misfortune resulting from
early marriage at any great length, suffice it to say that where nuptial partners are forced
on one another without consulting the feeling of the actual participants themselves,
nothing but sexual impurity, discord and misery are likely to result from their living
together under one roof. The shortening of the period of self-control also tends to
engender sexual promiscuity, by exciting sex-passion which uncultured minds, not yet
impressed with the necessity for its rigid control, are apt to regard as the greatest of
earthly pleasures. The third form of evil, that is the procreation of unfit children, is a
necessary consequence of early marriage, since in those cases where the father has no
independent means of his own and is too young to be in a position to support a large and
growing family, none but unhealthy paupers can be brought into existence. Health of a
child, it should be observed, depends, to a large extent, on the development of the person
of the mother, so that where a girl who is only fit to play with dolls is forced to develop a
living baby in her womb, the growing embryo is necessarily deprived of the healthy
nourishment which every child has a right to demand of its mother. In many cases where
the pelvis is not sufficiently developed to form a suitable place for the physical growth of
the embryo, inflammation and other unhealthy complications also set up in the womb,
causing the death of the child or its mother or both. The main thing to be known in
connection with sexual gratification is that excessive and early loss of semen directly leads
to loss of bodily and mental vigor, and produces a kind of nervous paralysis which
interferes materially with the concentration of mind and strength of will, the two necessary
factors in the ascertainment and practicing of 'truth'. We thus observe that early marriage
is equally condemnable from both the spiritual and secular points of view.
We now come to the principles governing the selection of one's associates in life
--the nuptial partner, friends and the like. In this department also religion enjoins
subordinating the worldly or sensual point of view to the spiritual, its aim being always to
facilitate the onward progress of the soul toward the highest goal-- Nirvana. Obviously, if
the husband and wife belong to two different persuasions, or entertain mutually hostile
beliefs, nothing like spiritual harmony can possibly result from their union; and the
situation is no wise improved even when they both try to pull on together in the most
commendable spirit of toleration, for toleration cannot possibly take the place of
co-operation which is altogether excluded by the opposition of private convictions. It
follows, therefore, that the selection of a suitable spouse must be made from one's own
community, so as to ensure perfect accord and co-operation in respect of all matters,
spiritual and temporal. The same principal governs the selection of all other associates, as
far as practicable; and even the caste system, which is so much denounced nowadays, is
really the outcome of the rules laid down for satsanga (association).
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

A keen controversy has been recently raging round the caste question, and many
persons have come forward to advocate a complete breaking down of its fast and rigid
boundaries, but as the matter has not been approached from the spiritual side of the
question, it is worthwhile to consider its bearing from that point of view s well. No one
who has at all studied the human nature is likely to deny the fact that our beliefs are liable
to be affected by the thoughts and actions of others-- receiving confirmation and strength
from people of one's own faith, and direct or indirect discouragement from those who
follow a different creed. Now, the generality of mankind of this age seldom possess that
degree of faith which is capable of withstanding persistent temptation or sustained attacks
of skepticism, especially when not directly made. The company of people given to
gambling, debauchery, and the like is the most dangerous for this reason, and offers many
temptations which even men of mature judgment, to say nothing of raw youths, at times
succumb to. Besides, the true spirit of friendship demands that one should not perform
any religious acts likely to offend one's companion in the least degree, and since all forms
of worship are open to objection on the part of the opponents of the true faith, good
companionship necessitates a total abstention from them in the company of those of a
different persuasion. The effect of such forms of comradeship, thus, is quite pernicious to
the aspirations of the soul, and requires the restriction of association with those outside
one's own religious community to particular occasions at well selected times and places.
This does not mean that one should be rude or intolerant to those who do not belong to
one's faith, but only that one should avoid undue intimacy and constant companionship
with them. As no one who values his peace of mind should associate with anarchists,
sedition-mongers, robbers, murderers and the like, howsoever agreeable they be, so should
one avoid, so far as possible, all those men whose association is likely to seduce one from
the true path, and only mix with those of a holy and pious temperament. Such, briefly, is
the nature of the reason of caste exclusiveness, and there is no reason to doubt that any
one who realizes the importance of keeping the spiritual goal in view, in all forms of
activity, would never range himself against its observance. This, however, furnishes no
license for the absolute exclusiveness of different castes in the same community, beyond
certain limits to be shortly pointed out.
There are two principles governing caste division, namely,
(1) The religious, and
(2) The secular.
The former of these recognizes only one community or caste of true believers,
while the latter classifies men according to their occupations. The earliest legislator, Shri
Rishabha Deva Bhagwan, divided men into Kshatryas, Vaishyas and Shudras*, with
regard to their different avocations.
(*The Hindu idea that the Brahmans, Kshatryas, vaishyas, and Shudras issued from the
mouth, arms, heart and thighs of Brahma is evidently a mythological metaphor, resting
upon the personifications of 'manhood' as a being.)
The principle+ of division lay in the fact that the prosperity of a community depends on the
defense of its territory, the development of its trade and the due performance of their work
by the menials.
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

(+It will be generally seen to be the case that a man is more likely to excel in the calling of
his ancestors than in an entirely strange occupation. It is, for instance, not to be
expected that a Mahajan's son, who has spent all his life in comfort and luxury or in
looking after the peaceful business of his own firm, would make as good a soldier as the
young Rajaputa conscious of his descent from the royal Pratap. The glorious traditions
of the Kshatryas Varna (warrior caste), stories of exciting adventures of brave Rajaputa
warriors, memories of deeds of undying glory of his own ancestors, to say nothing of the
thousand and one other items and incidents which invest the latter with an irrepressible
psychic vigor which constitutes a great advantage over his rival, the majahan's son.
Reverse the position, and you will find the brave warrior out of his element in the counting
house. The same is the case with other Vargas.)
The Brahman class came into existence during the reign of Bharata, the son of the
first Tirthankara. Later on, Hinduism fully accepted this classification of men into four
Varna, and made it the basis of its yoga, making each caste correspond to a particular
department of that system, --Jnana yoga for Brahmans, raja yoga for Kshatryas, karma
yoga for vaishyas and Bhakti yoga for Shudras. It is, however, clear that the idea of caste
exclusiveness had nothing to do with the classification of men, as originally conceived, so
that all those who followed the true faith were entitled to the same rights and privileges in
respect of religious worship. It was only when priesthood acquired considerable influence
on the ruling body that Hindu legislators were forced to recognize the claim of Brahmans
to a special sanctity as a class.
So far as inter dining is concerned, it does not seem to have ever been prohibited
among the followers of one and the same religion, but it is essentially a question of
conventional usage upon which depend the preservation, welfare and prosperity of society.
There are certain considerations which necessarily debar one from being admitted into
the higher circles of a community even in Christian and Muslim countries, where the
intercourse of men is the least restricted, and there is nothing surprising in the fact that the
Hindus and Jainas should not care to sit down at the same table with washer men,
sweepers, and others of similar description whose professions and habits of life hardly
render them suitable companions at a feast. The penalty for an infringement of these rules,
it may be pointed out, is not the loss of religion, but only excommunication, which implies
nothing more than exclusion from social circles in respect of inter- dining, and,
consequently, also, inter- marriage, for a shorter or longer period according to the nature
of transgression.
The basis of caste exclusiveness, then, is not wealth or worldly status, as it
undoubtedly is in European society, but spiritual purity pure and simple, though people
sometimes unreasonably extend its operation to cases not actually falling within its scope.
Some excuse for the wider application of the caste rule among the Hindus is to be found
in the fact that their religion has become the fold of so many different and divergent forms
of belief that it is practically impossible to bring the followers of all of them on a common
platform. So far, however, as Jainism is concerned, it is perfectly free from the rules of
caste, those professing it forming only one community, notwithstanding the fact that
several schisms have given rise to different sects and sub-sects among its followers. In
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

this respect it resembles modern Christianity which includes Roman Catholics, Protestants
and others who hold many more points of faith in common than otherwise. There can
obviously be no question of losing caste, or religion, by intermarriage among the different
sects of one and the same community, though it is not countenanced on the ground of its
not being conducive to the peace of the family, as already shown.
We now come to a consideration of the principle of Ahimsa which is described as
the highest form of Dharma (religion), and which must be observed if release from
samsara be the ideal in view. Unfortunately this is one of those doctrines which has been
grossly misunderstood by men-- by some on account of an inadequate acquaintance with
the basic, truths of religion, and by others because of a fanciful notion that its observance
interferes with the enjoyment of pleasures of taste and the realization of dreams of
world-power. We shall consider both these objections one by one before explaining the
actual practical application of this doctrine.
Firstly, as regards the pleasures of taste, it will be seen that taste is merely an
acquired thing, and that it is not in the food, which tastes differently at different times and
under different circumstances, but in the attitude of the soul towards it. This is evident
from the fact that many of the things which one finds nauseating and disgusting at first
become palatable after a time, with the perversion and defilement of the natural instincts of
the soul.
This leads us to the conclusion that one can train his instincts in whichever
direction one likes in respect of food. The testimony of vegetarians, especially of those
who have given up animal-food by choice, is available to show that their meals are not any
the less tasteful because not containing meat.
But the question for a rational mind is not whether the animal food is more tasty
than a vegetarian diet, but whether it is wise to eat it? A proper regard for one's future
welfare requires that one should control one's senses in all respects where they are in
conflict with one's good. Uncontrolled sense-indulgence has been described by the wise as
a sign of lurking 'cattle-dom'; and it would be certainly foolish to allow the tongue to eat
up one's chances of salvation, or to mar the future prospects of the soul.
The object of life, it has been pointed out by every thinking man, is not living to
eat, but eating to live. The Persian poet has it:
(Tr. 'Eating is to sustain life and meditation;
Thou holdest it to be the (sole) object living!'
The second considerations apply to political ambition for what shall a man profit if he gain
of the goods of the world but lose his own soul? Accordingly the poet asks the shade of
the Great Warrior who had filled the world with deeds of his renown:-
[Tr. How long didst thou live?--
To what purpose killedsxt thou Dara (Darius?]
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

When the redoubtable Mahmud of Ghazni was on his death- bed, it is said that he
had all the plundered wealth of India brought before him to pass it in review for the last
time. It was a touching sight to see this old warrior who had carried pillage and sword no
less than eleven times to India, lying with the stamp of despair on his ghastly face. There
he lay surrounded by his warrior hosts, his weapons still lying within reach and his riches
in front, but conscious of the fast-approaching Foe, and of his utter helplessness against
it-- a true picture of the final scene in the drama of world- power and its inevitable end!
Can we doubt after this that Ahimsa is the highest religion, the Dharma which sustains
and supports? Life is dear to all, and it is the recognition of the right to the joy of living in
others that ensures our own joy. Sadi says:
[Tr. 'Do not injure the ant which is a carrier of grain;
For it has life, and life is dear to all;]
It is wrong to imagine that we can prosper in defiance of Dharma, or that Ahimsa
is the cause of political downfall. Were the Hindus vanquished by Mohammedan because
they observed Ahimsa? --or because their mutual feuds and jealousies prevented them
from presenting a combined front to the invaders? Ahimsa does not forbid a king from
fighting in defense of his kingdom; nor were the armies and kings that offered battle to the
Musalman horde pure vegetarians. The fact is that Dharma is the true source of strength,
even when practiced in a 'second-hand' manner; but it must be lived to be productive of
good. Where it is not put into practice, it is bound to disappear, whether the books
containing its teaching continue to exist or disappear in the bellies of moths. Those who
practice Ahimsa become contented, thoughtful, self-centered and brave; and are respected
by others with whom they may come in contact; for, as already observed, Dharma raises
the rhythm of the soul, and Ahimsa is the highest Dharma.
Here again we conclude that those who put the accent on the spiritual side of life--
and it is the true side-- cannot but recognize Ahimsa to be the highest Dharma and the joy
and glory of living.
In actual practice the operation of Ahimsa Parmao Dharma-- Ahimsa is the
highest Dharma-- necessary varies with the circumstances of each individual soul, in as
much as most of the Jivas are so circumstanced that it is impossible for them to avoid all
forms of Hinsa at once. Jainism does not lose sight of this fact, but takes it fully into
account in the formulation of the rules of conduct, which it lays down for the guidance of
its followers. The layman, when he enters the path which leads to Perfection and Bliss,
begins by avoiding the doing of unnecessary harm; he then applies himself to the
restricting of his desires and wants, and, finally, when the powers of his soul are developed
by the giving up of all kinds of desires, and he becomes qualified for the attainment of
Nirvana, the practicing of absolute Ahimsa becomes easy and natural to him. There is no
absurdity in this, for the development of the soul, under the influence of Tapa, brings into
manifestation its latent occult and psychic forces which enable it to defy all sorts of
adverse influences, such as hunger, thirst, sickness, old age and death, that lead on to the
commission of all conceivable kinds of injury to others. The layman should try to refrain
from all those pursuits and occupations, such as cutting down forests, working as a
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

blacksmith and the like which involve a wholesale destruction of life, though he may not
be able to avoid all forms of Hinsa at once. He need entertain no fear of the business of
the world coming to a stand-still by his abstaining from these avocations, since there are a
sufficient number of Abhavya Jivas* to carry them on and to insure the continuance of the
world.
(*Those who may never attain emancipation.)
These are they who have not the potentiality to understand the truth. It is not that their
souls are any different from those of the Bhavya (the antithesis of Abhavya), but their
karmas are of such a malignant type that they can never long for the truth or grasp it when
put before them. They shall never attain Nirvana, but always remain entangled in the
samsara.
The man who longs for the joy of Gods must prepare himself for the practicing of
absolute Ahimsa by a steady course of training. He should begin with abstaining from
causing unnecessary injury to all kinds of beings having more than one sense. With
respect to the evolution of sense, living beings all under the following five classes:--
(1) One-sensed beings who possess only the sense of touch, such as vegetables;
(2) Two-sensed beings, i.e., those which possess touch and taste both, such as protozoa
and certain varieties of shell-fish;
(3) Three-sensed beings, who also enjoy the sense of smell in addition to touch and taste,
such as lice, bugs and ants;
(4) Four-sensed beings who are endowed with all the senses except hearing, and
(5) Five-sensed beings.
In addition to their appropriate or specific senses, all living beings possess three kinds of
forces of life, namely Ayuh, bodily strength and the power of breathing. The power of
communicating with others, which in the higher grades of life assumes the form of speech,
is enjoyed by the two-sensed and other higher types, while mind is a distinguishing feature
of the five-sensed type alone, though all Jivas belonging to that class are not endowed
with it. These ten kinds of forces-- five senses, Ayuh, bodily strength, breathing, speech
and mind-- are called the ten pranas.
Now, all five kinds of living beings are souls capable of feeling pain though not
always in anticipation of injury, for that kind of pain is felt only by those of the fifth class
who evolve out a mind -- men, monkeys, dogs and the like. All kinds of living beings,
however possess the Karma and the taijasa Shareers whose separation from the body of
gross matter is called death --a painful process at all times, and more so when the bodies
are separated by force of external violence. Pain is also felt by all kinds of living beings
when their limbs are cut, pierced, torn asunder or otherwise mutilated.
Hinsa is the causing of pain to another and includes all kinds of acts calculated to
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

interfere with one's enjoyment of life or freedom in respect of one's pranas.
The following table will enable the reader to form a general idea of its main types
at a glance:--
Hinsa
|
--------------------------------------
| |
injuring one-sensed beings injuring the remaining types of living beings
(B)
| |
----------------------------
| |
deliberate accidental
|
_______________________________
| |
due to carelessness implied in the struggle for
(C) existence
(D)
Deliberate
|
-------------------------------------------------------------------
| |
necessary (E) Wanton (F)
__________________________________________________ |
| | | | |
in defiance of for the main- in the treat- in the em- |
(i) body, tenance of ment of ployment of |
(ii) property law and wounds etc. men and |
and order. animals for |
(iii) country. the purposes |
of trade, |
etc., etc. |
l
l
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------=l
| | | | |
killing for sport slavery sacrifice vivisection
food, trade,
etc.
The layman very naturally, is not expected to avoid injuring the one-sensed beings,
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

nor can he refrain from all other kinds of injury except wanton cruelty. He is, there fore
required to practice Ahimsa in respect of class F. The Muni is, however able to avoid
injuring others in all cases falling under classes D., E and F., and also to a great extent,
under class C. The kevali who has conquered the twenty two forms of parisaha (see page
57 ante) does not cause any kind of Hinsa, and the same is the case with the Siddha who
has no material impurities left in his soul.
Thus the practical observance of the principles of Hinsa varies with the
circumstance of each soul, so that the least advanced begin with the renunciation of
wanton cruelty, and gradually train themselves to observe the stricter vows of a Muni. As
personal wants and desires become limited to bare food, once a day or so, the practicing
of the higher forms of Ahimsa is not felt to be irksome or difficult; and finally, when the
powers of the soul are developed to perfection and complete mastery over the lower
nature is obtained, resulting in the manifestation of those subtle and powerful forces which
enable the kevali to defy all kinds of adverse influences -- hunger, thirst, sickness, old age,
death and the like-- the observance of absolute Ahimsa becomes perfectly easy and
natural.
As Mr. Warren points out (see 'Jainism' by H. Warren), if we study the state of the
mind of a person engaged in the act of killing, we shall notice that he is not only indifferent
to the suffering and pain he is causing to his victim for his own selfish ends --sometimes he
actually delights in it --but has also no idea of the subtle forces engendered by such an act
in his own system. His three characteristics, therefore, are thoughtlessness, selfishness and
heartlessness, which are the greatest obstacles the soul encounters on the path of spiritual
unfolding. In the same way, the analysis of the mind of the victim discloses the presence,
in addition to an intense feeling of pain, of such elements as horror, fear, hatred,
resentment and despair of the worst possible type, each of which tends to produce a state
of mental disquietude highly inimical to the progress of its soul. The result is that those
who disregard the true teaching of religion and take on the path of Hinsa are not only the
enemies of their own souls, but also of those of their helpless victims.
It would be interesting to work out the further and future consequences of Hinsa
on the souls of the slayer and the victim both. Bearing in mind the fact that the future
re-birth is always determined by the nature of the tendencies evolved out by the soul, it
can be safely laid down that the being whose habitual mental attitude is characterized by
heartlessness, selfishness and thoughtfulness must necessarily be drawn to a type of life
marked by these mental traits. When we look out for the appropriate type for those who
are habitually cruel, unfeeling and thoughtless, we discover it to be amongst the
unthinking beasts of prey-- tigers, wolves, hawks, cats and the like-so that the future
re-birth of him who has spent his life in developing these peculiarities of disposition must
necessarily be in the tribe of some wild bird or beast, the actual type depending on the
degree of cruelty evolved out in each individual case. In some cases where the soul is
thoroughly steeped in Hinsa it directly descends into hells, as the scriptures show. The
case with the victim of sporting lust, however, stands on a different footing, since the
feelings of anger horror, pain and the like are not habitual with him. Hence its future re-
birth would not necessarily be amongst the worst types of living beings, though the
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

predominant feelings of the closing moments of life might impart their tinge to the
character already formed, and bear fruit in the shape of nicha gotra and inauspicious
surroundings.
Thus, no one who has studied the true nature of his soul and of the causes, which tend to
prolong its bond would ever find fault with Ahimsa being the true path of liberation and
the highest Dharma.
COMPARATIVE ANTIQUITY OF JAINISM
I propose in this article to place before the world the result of investigation in comparative
religion, in so far as it tends to fix the comparative ages of two of the world's oldest
religions, namely, Jainism and Hinduism. I am aware that my views are not very likely to
be acceptable to the generality of the readers at present, but I am confident that they shall
ultimately prevail. Such is always the case with all new 'things'.
If I were not a Jaina, it would be easier for me to say what I have to say, for in
that case I should not be exposed to attacks, vicious and otherwise, on the count of bias
and bigotry, in as much as the result of the investigations made by me is the establishment
of the greater antiquity of Jainism. Nevertheless, I give my reasons for this conclusion and
leave the reader to say what he likes about me and my method.
It is now established as the result of recent research, especially of the finds at
Mohenjo-Daro, that Jainism flourished actually long, long before the time of the twenty
third Tirthankara, Parsva Nath. The age of the finds at Mohenjo-Daro is probably
5000-7000 years ago in the past. Hinduism also flourished then side by side with Jainism.
The question is, which of them is prior in time?
Of the scriptures of Hinduism it is now recognized on all hands that the Rig Veda
is the oldest, so that if we are to understand its origin we can only do so with the aid of
the Rig Veda, which appears to be the oldest written scripture extant. The language of the
Rig Veda is certainly older than the language of any of the Jaina Books, but this may be
due to its expression being fixed up, by poetry, before that of any of the Jaina works,
which are known to have existed in memory alone at one time. The test of language is
therefore, unreliable in this case, though if there was nothing to contradict it, it would
carry the point a long way in favor of Hinduism.
But we shall turn to the intrinsic evidence of the oldest Veda. The question is,
what was the religion of the people who possessed only the Rig Veda and none of the
subsequent accumulations and accretions of scriptural lore now possessed by the Hindus?
The Rig Veda has been subjected to a great deal of criticism by friend and foe in
recent times, but no one has found in its four corners ought but the worship of such things
as the sun, clouds fire and the like. There is no trace of the essentials of the Hindu
Religion, as they are known today, in the hymns of the great Veda. Transmigration and
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

Karma, renunciation and asceticism, and yoga are not to be found in the Rig Veda, or at
least have to be spelt out with great labor from the text. The summum bonum --Nirvana--
itself is not present to the mind in the medley of what appears to be pure nature worship.
European scholars have in reality not found anything but superstition and idolatry
in the poetry of the Rig Veda. If this view be taken to be true, then the purport of the
Veda would hardly be termed religion by any thoughtful person, seeking to know what
salvation implied and how was transmigration to be brought to an end, karma broken
through and Nirvana attainted. As such it would not be worth the while of a Jaina to seek
to establish the greater anciency of his own religion, which from the earliest times known
has consistently taught the path to Bliss and Blessedness in Nirvana by the destruction of
karmas. For it is frankly admitted in Jainism that superstition and Enlightenment are
coeval. Indeed the 'Light' may disappear from time to time and reappear again, but
superstition in one form or another is more or less continuous. The position would then
simply be this, that among religions Jainism would be the oldest, but amongst the creeds
that fostered nature-worship that of the Rig Veda would be taken to be the most ancient.
But this view is falsified by a scientific study of comparative religion. What this
study has revealed clearly to me is that under-lying this very seeming nature- worship lies
hidden a scientific teaching and a doctrine which is identical in all respects with the
Teaching of the Jinas. The Sun for instance is emblematic of the fullness of knowledge and
not a gigantic moving star; Indra is the soul embodied in matter; Agni is Tapascharana
which leads to release from the bondage of karma and transmigration. Those scholars
who took the gods of the Rig Veda to stand for nature powers did not have their attention
drawn to the possibility of a secret religious or spiritual interpretation, and therefore
merely put down the creed of the Vedas a a form if idolatry and superstition. I shall not
attempt in this article to demonstrate the truth of my interpretation, but am content to
refer the reader to my books in which the subject has been dealt with at great length and
the legends and myths of different countries and creeds have been interpreted in a
scientific way. Here it is sufficient to state that my interpretations are in full accord with
the true spirit of Hinduism and the elucidation of the Hindu Scriptures themselves.
I take it, then, that instead of being a mere ancient form of nature cult, the religion
of the Rig Veda is revealed to be a scientific and systematic one, the most remarkable
feature of which is its complete agreement with Jainism. In different language, Jainism
and Hinduism are found to be teaching the same thing, though the one uses plain
languages and the other is concealed in disguise and mystifying thought.
When did any of them really originate we do not know, if we leave out of
consideration the evidence to the contrary furnished by the Jaina Books. The only
material from which a deduction for the greater ancientness in favor of any one of them
can be drawn thus is the fact that they teach the same thing, and that the language of the
Veda is allegorical while that of Jainism is plain.
But I think that this fact is quite sufficient to determine the comparative ages of the
two Faiths. For it is clear to me that allegory must have had a basis of prior fact to fix
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

itself upon. If the Teaching was not known before, how could it be allegorized? In other
words, who so ever allegorized the doctrines of the Science of Salvation must have known
them, so that allegory is easily posterior to science or fact.
Shall we now try to seek a scientific basis for the allegories of the Rig Veda
outside Jainism? But such an attempt is foredoomed to fail, for we have not the faintest
trace of any such religion if Jainism is to be rejected. The best thing is to recognize that
such a rejection will be simply the outside of prejudice, and not an act prompted by good
reason. There has been no other scientific and scientifically expressed religion in the
world, and certainly there was none beyond 7000 years ago in the past.
It is not necessary for the purposes of this article to insist upon the absolute
accuracy of the Teaching of Religion, though I am fully convinced of it. The historian has
not studied the subject, and cannot be readily expected to accept my ipse dixit on the
point. It is sufficient for my present purpose if it be understood that the teachings of the
Rig Veda, when properly interpreted and understood reveal identically the same
groundwork of scientifically expressed thought as is found in Jainism. If this is once
accepted it would follow that both these religions, namely, Jainism and Veda are merely
the work of the one and the same body of men, some of whom allegorized the Teaching of
their Religion, while some did not. We can say, if we like, that there was a scientific
religion of the ancient Aryans which is expressed in allegorical garb in the Rig Veda, but
which was handed down in plain language, as Jainism, to those who did not allegorize.
Sharp differences would naturally arise between the followers of the two faiths after the
lapse of a sufficient time when the purport and meaning of the allegories was obscured
and lost, so that there is nothing surprising if the Hindus and the Jainas have not been the
best of friends in the world for centuries.
The above conclusion is amply supported by the testimony of the Jaina Books; but
even Hinduism acknowledges the great antiquity of Jainism, naming its Founder Rishabha
Deva, who lived, according to the testimony of certain of the Hindu Puranas, millions of
years ago. That religion flourished so far back in the past might be questioned by those
who have not studied it as a science; but there is nothing surprising in its antiquity if
humanity itself was present --and modern science tells up that man has peopled the Earth
for hundreds of millions of years -- then.
It should be stated that the Jainas can not be Hindu dissenters by any possibility.
Whenever there is a division in a community the bulk of the creed remains the same and
common to the parts or branches thus formed. The differences arise in respect of a few
matters only. But if we regard Hinduism as non-allegorical and then compare it with
Jainism, the differences are very great. Their agreement is in respect of a few particulars
only, excepting those matters, which concern the ordinary mode and living (civilization).
Even the ceremonies, which appear to be similar are, in reality different in respect of their
purport, if carefully studied. The Jainas regard the world as eternal; the Hindus hold it to
have been created by a creator. Worship in Jainism is offered only to men who have
attained the perfection of Godhood, but to no one else; in Hinduism its object is supposed
to be a god who is the creator and ruler of the world. Hinduism believes in a large
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

number of additional gods; in Jainism there is no room for any one in the class of Gods
except Perfect Men.
The significance of worship itself is different in the two religions. In Jainism the
idea is only that of walking in the footsteps of a Model, to become like Him; there is no
prayer and no offering of food and unguents to please the Deity. In Hinduism it is the
propitiation of gods for which worship is performed. In respect of their Scriptures also
great differences prevail between Jainism and Hinduism. Not one of the Books of the
Hindus is acceptable to the Jainas, nor do the Hindus acknowledge a single composition of
the latter. The contents of these scriptures also differ very materially. Not one part of the
four Vedas and the 18 Puranas of the Hindus is included in the Jaina Scriptures, nor is any
part of the Jaina Sacred Literature included in the Hindu Books. The matters in respect of
which there seems to be an agreement between the two communities are purely social;
their significance wherever they have a religious bearings is divergent. Ordinary
agreement in respect of such matters is naturally to be expected wherever two
communities are found living together for thousands of years, especially if intermarriages
take place among them, as between the Hindus and the Jainas. Thus, there is not an iota of
evidence to support the notion that Jainas are Hindu dissenters.
To sum up: there are three possible views of the relationship between Jainism and
Hinduism namely,
1. That the former is the child of the latter,
2. That the latter is the child of the former; and
3. That the two are parallel creeds, which have existed side by side without the one being
an off- shoot of the other.
Of these, the first is a pure assumption, and not supported by any evidence extrinsic or
intrinsic; the second rests on the intrinsic evidence, and proceeds on the basis of the Vedas
having an esoteric, that is to say, an allegorical interpretation; and the third is the only
remaining alternative which will hold good if the allegorical theory is to be rejected for any
adequate reason. When the scholars will approach the question from the standpoint of the
allegorical interpretation of the Vedas the true view will come to prevail easily then.
I shall now conclude this article by quoting the following weighty observations of Sir
Kumaraswami Sastri, the officiating Chief Justice of the Madras High Court and a learned
Hindu Scholar (see in re B. Gentappa v. B. Eramma, Indian Law Reports, Madras series,
Vol. 50, pp, 229-230):--
"Were the matter res integra I would be inclined to hold that modern research has shown
that Jains are not Hindu dissenters but that Jainism has an origin and history long anterior
to the Smritis and Commentaries which are recognized authorities on Hindu Law and
usage. In fact, Maha Veera, the last of the Jain Tirthankar, was a contemporary of
Buddha and died about 527 B.C. The Jain religion refers to a number of previous
Tirthankar and there can be little doubt that Jainism as a distinct religion was flourishing
several centuries before Christ. In fact Jainism rejects the authority of the Vedas which
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

form the bed-rock of Hinduism and denies the efficacy of the various ceremonies which
Hindus consider essential."
"There is a great force in the observations of Holloway, J. in Rithucurn Lalla v. Soojan
Mull Lalla (9 Madras Jurist 21) that Hindu Law cannot be applied to them. So far as Jain
Law is concerned it has its own law books of which Bhadrabahu Samhita is an important
one. Vardhamanaa Niti and Arhana Niti by the great Jain teacher Hemachandra deal also
with Jain Law. No doubt by long association with Hindus who form the bulk of the
population Jainism has assimilated several of the customs and ceremonial practices of the
Hindus, but this is no ground for applying Hindu Law as developed by Vignaneswara and
other commentators, several centuries after Jainism was a distinct and separate religion
with its own religion ceremonial and legal systems, en bloc to Jains and throwing on them
the onus of showing that they are not bound by the law as laid down by Jain Law-givers.
It seems to me that in considering questions of Jain Law relating to adoption, succession
and partition we have to see what the law as expounded by Jain Law-givers is and to
throw the onus on those who assert that in any particular matter the Jains have adopted
Hindu Law and custom and have not followed the law as laid down by their own
Law-givers."
SOUL-SUBSTANCE
The word substance used with reference to the soul is not generally appreciated or
understood. But it simply means some- thingness, and is a philosophical term employed to
denote the idea of a some thing which depends on it self for its existence, that is to say,
which is self-existent. All simple things, as distinguished from compounds, are self-
subsisting, hence, indestructible and eternal. Perishing is associated only with what is
made up of parts that might fall apart. Hence what is a simple (partless) thing in its nature
cannot be wiped out to existence.
Consciousness, too, is a something, for we are aware of its operations. It is also
dependent on itself for its existence, and is partless and non-composite in its nature, as
shown elsewhere in my writings. Therefore, it is also a substance. The name soul has
been given to it from the point of view of substantiveness.
The materialistic theory that a primary nucleus of tactile sensitivity, bound up in
the simple atom of matter, has, in the course of evolution, evolved out into the highly
complex consciousness of man, is not tenable and valid, as it is inconceivable how a simple
sensation of touch can possible transform itself into taste, smell, sight, hearing,
understanding, ratiocination and the like. The one great difference between consciousness
and atomic matter is this: consciousness is endowed with an 'interior' which is capable of
entertaining and developing an infinity of ideas and concepts, but the atom of matter has
no inside to accommodate even a thought.
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

Knowledge is the nature of the soul. If it were not the nature of the soul, it would
be either the nature of the not- soul, or of nothing whatsoever. But in the former case, the
unconscious would become the conscious, and the soul would be unable to know itself or
any one else, for it would then be devoid of consciousness; and, in the latter, there would
be no knowledge, nor conscious beings in existence, which, happily, is not the case.
It might be urged that knowledge, consciousness, or the power to know or cognize, is an
independent quality which, when it comes in contact with the soul, enables it to perceive
and know itself and other things, but his is untenable on the ground that qualities only
inhere in substances* and cannot be conceived to exist independently of concrete things.
The fact is that qualities are pure mental abstractions; no one has ever seen them existing
by themselves.
(*That qualities inhere in substances in a self- evident truth, for they cannot be
conceived to exist by themselves. If they could lead an existence independently of
substance, we should have softness, hardness, manhood and the like also existing by
themselves, which would be absurd. Moreover, if qualities were capable of leading an
independent existence of their own, existence also would exist separately from all other
qualities. But this would make existence it self a featureless function or attribute of
nothing whatsoever, on the one hand, and all the other remaining qualities simply
non-existent, on the other, because existence would no longer be associated with them. It
follows, therefore, that qualities cannot be conceived to exist apart from substances.)
The soul is a wonderful thing; it is a substance, and at the same time is the repository of
knowledge. Knowledge and memory do not exist in it like loose images stocked in a
drawer, or photos in an album but as the diversified aspects of a partless entity, the
mutually interpenetrating flashes or coruscation's of a hug undivided conscious
illumination, or as a multitude of inseparable and co-existing notes or rhythms of a unitary
intelligent force.
From the point of view of somethingness, the soul is a substance; from that of
consciousness it is a pure embodiment of knowledge, consisting in an infinity of
inseparable; and yet separately perceivable, scintillation's of intelligence itself, and from
the point of view of energy it is an unbreakable unit of force that cannot be exhausted by
any means, being eternal and non-perishing, in its nature.
As shown elsewhere the soul suffers the loss of functions and dignity by the association
with matter. But new attributes, which, however, are poor substitutes for the things lost,
arise in its constitution. Sense perception thus replaces the full direct knowledge, which a
pure Soul enjoys. The soul also evolved out harmful appetites and instincts, namely, those
of hunger and fear and sex and the love of possession. These are the roots of desire and
the feeders of its passions, which stand in the way of its salvation. Delusion is also
produced by the flowing matter in the consciousness of living beings. All living beings
firmly believe themselves to be identical with the body, and never anything other than the
body. Only a very few are able to escape from this terrible delusion; and they are the lucky
ones who shall, by treading the Right Path, obtain release from the bondage of the flesh
and matter, one day.
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

The appetites are all rooted in the body, even the one that is called the love or instinct of
possession. It is these appetites which have to be eradicated before salvation can be had,
for through their gratification additional matter is constantly pouring into the soul, which
perpetuates its bondage.
The order of the eradication of these instincts is as follows:
(1) The pious householder virtually conquers the instinct of possession at the time when
he sells off his belongings and gives them away, and the remaining tinge of it, when he
parts from the very last vestige of possessions, namely, the loin-strip.
(2) The sex- instinct is also eradicated by the householder prior to his parting with his
belongings.
(3) The saint grapples with the instinct of hunger and eradicates it before the attainment of
omniscience.
(4) The instinct of fear is a bit more difficult to be radiated. The saint easily conquers the
rear of death, but seems to experience a great deal of difficulty in overthrowing the fear of
sickness and disease, that is to say, the love of the bodily well- being. In consequence of
this he even experiences a fall from the Samadhi of self- contemplation many a time. But
even this little bit of fear is conquered at last by the combined power of self-knowledge
and the joy of self-contemplation, aided, probably, by the reinforcement of the
Sallekhana*- thought that enable a saint to face calamity with tranquility.
(*See the next following article for the description of the term.)
When the physical appetites are all gone the soul is freed from the element of desire and
speedily obtains release and wholeness, and is reinstated at once in its natural Divinity and
Godhood.
Vairagya Bhavana
Shri Arhat kai darshan jo aik bar pa jatai
Nikal sansar sagar sai vhan ham moksh sukh patai
(1) Could we obtain the (grace of the) Arhantas darshan (Sight) but once,
Escaping from the Ocean of Samsara (Repeated births and deaths, i.e. transmigration),
speedily we should attain the beatitude of Moksha (Salvation)!
Tamana apnee bar atee, muradain dil kee pa jatai
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

Guru nirgranth kai charanro main sir ko gar jhuka patai
(2) The purport of Life would be fulfilled, the heart's desire realized;
Should we but have the luck to bend the head at the feet of the Nirgrantha Guru
(Jaina saints are called Nirgrantha).
Fana ka dora dora hae, kyam unka hae aalam main
Jwanee husno daulat jindgee sab haen mitai jatai
(3) Death is the Empire, stability is a dream! Youth, beauty, riches and life all are perishing
away!
Uthaeen marnai jeenai kee anantai bar takleefain
Yoon nit-nit rojh marnai sai to 'kash' aik bar mar jatai
(4) An infinity of times have the pains been endured of (repeated) birth and death! Would
that we had once died for good, to be rid of this constant daily dying!
Shranr kaesi, maded kiskee, naheen firiyadaras koi
Voh daikho, Yam kee darhon main haen sab kai sab pisai jatai
(5) Who is the refuge? Whose help to seek? there is none to listen to the wail (of the
soul)!
Look! all are being ground in the Jaws of Death!
Na sathi hae na sangee hae koi jeevon ka alam main
Alailai paeda hotai haen, akailai hee haen mar jatai
(6) There is no companion of souls in the world, not a wayfaring associate!
Alone are they born, alone also do they die!
Naheen jab jism ho apna, to kaesa ghaer sai rishta
Han, na phehaimeen sai putr va mitra apnai haen kahai jatai
(7) When even the body is not one's own, how, then, can another be relation of the Self?
Through delusion, verily, are termed one's won the friend and the son?
Dhaka hae cham sai dhancha, bhara hae mal va mootr sai yaih
Yaih hee haen log jiskee khubiyon pai nitye haen itratai
(8) With (leather) parchment is the skeleton covered; it is filled with urine and filth!
Is this the thing, whose excellence has turned men's heads?
Chatur gati roop aalam hae nheen sukh sai yhan koee
Manushya tiryanch narakdaiv haen dukh sai sab chilatai
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

9) Characterized by the Gati (Residents of heavens) quartette is this world of life; happy
therein is none!
Devas (Residents of heavens) and men, lower kingdoms and hells-all are crying
with pain!
Abas kee bandgee batil buton kee jhoothai daivon kee
Jo sanvar nirjra kartai to dil ka mudua patai
(10) In vain, have we worshipped false gods and guides that only lead one astray;
Had we but stopped and destroyed the karmas; the wish of the heart we should
have had!
Manushya kee joon durlabh hae jo virthan haen isai khotai
Voh aasanee sai moka phir nheen hae doosra patai
(11) Difficult of attainment is the human form; those who now dissipate it away,
Will never easily again obtain another such (golden) chance.
Ahinsa dharm hae sacha, Ahimsa mool hae tap ka
Ahimsa palnai sai karm bandhan sab haen jharh jatai
(12) True is the Dharma (Religion) that teaches non-injuring; of saints non-injuring is the
root!
By the observance of the vow on non-injuring are destroyed the entirety of the
chains of karma!
Jo daikha gor sai to atma hee daiv hae sacha
Saiko sanyam isee kai johrai aslee nazar atai
(13) On proper reflection, the soul itself is found to be the truest God!
Joy and self-control would appear properly to appertain to the soul.
Khuda hae Daiv hae Triloki ka sarsaz hae, jan hae
Tamami pujya gunr haen zat main iskee nazar atai
(14) Khuda is He, He is Deva, too; the crown of Glory of the world, and Jina
(Conqueror)!
The infinity of the worshipful attributes all may be seen in Him!
Hyatai la mamatai va noorai khalis maot ka phataih
Jo aesa apnai janain avashya vai sidh pad patai
(15) Life that is Deathless, Effulgence Pure, the Conqueror of Death:
Those who know themselves as such, obtain the status of the Perfect Ones!
Sukho darshan va gyano veerya main nishchae sai hae pooran
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version

Isi kai gunr haen hooro jin malyak rat bin gatai
(16) In respect of Happiness, Perception, Knowledge and Power He is truly full!
Houris, jinn's, and angels chant His attributes (ceaselessly) night and day!
Karm bandhan sai chootai atma prmatma hovai
Bajooz iskai neheen kuchh pharak ham dono main
(17) Freed from the bondage of Karma, the Soul becomes a God!
There is no other difference that we can see between the two!
Create PDF with PDF4U. If you wish to remove this line, please click here to purchase the full version